---
title: Michael Abrash's Graphics Programming Black Book, Special Edition
author: Michael Abrash
date: '1997-07-01'
isbn: '1576101746'
publisher: The Coriolis Group
category: 'Web and Software Development: Game Development,Web and Software Development:
  Graphics and Multimedia Development'
chapter: '02'
pages: 028-030
---

### The Flexible Mind {#Heading8}

Is the never-ending collection of information all there is to the
assembly optimization, then? Hardly. Knowledge is simply a necessary
base on which to build. Let's take a moment to examine the objectives of
good assembly programming, and the remainder of the forces that act on
assembly optimization will fall into place.

Basically, there are only two possible objectives to high-performance
assembly programming: Given the requirements of the application, keep to
a minimum either the number of processor cycles the program takes to
run, or the number of bytes in the program, or some combination of both.
We'll look at ways to achieve both objectives, but we'll more often be
concerned with saving cycles than saving bytes, for the PC generally
offers relatively more memory than it does processing horsepower. In
fact, we'll find that two-to-three times performance improvements *over
already tight assembly code* are often possible if we're willing to
spend additional bytes in order to save cycles. It's not always
desirable to use such techniques to speed up code, due to the heavy
memory requirements—but it is almost always *possible*.

You will notice that my short list of objectives for high-performance
assembly programming does not include traditional objectives such as
easy maintenance and speed of development. Those are indeed important
considerations—to persons and companies that develop and distribute
software. People who actually *buy* software, on the other hand, care
only about how well that software performs, not how it was developed nor
how it is maintained. These days, developers spend so much time focusing
on such admittedly important issues as code maintainability and
reusability, source code control, choice of development environment, and
the like that they often forget rule \#1: From the user's perspective,
*performance is fundamental*.

  ------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](images/i.jpg)   *Comment your code, design it carefully, and write non-time-critical portions in a high-level language, if you wish—but when you write the portions that interact with the user and/or affect response time, performance must be your paramount objective, and assembly is the path to that goal*.
  ------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Knowledge of the sort described earlier is absolutely essential to
fulfilling either of the objectives of assembly programming. What that
knowledge doesn't do by itself is meet the need to write code that both
performs to the requirements of the application at hand and also
operates as efficiently as possible in the PC environment. Knowledge
makes that possible, but your programming instincts make it happen. And
it is that intuitive, on-the-fly integration of a program specification
and a sea of facts about the PC that is the heart of the Zen-class
assembly optimization.

As with Zen of any sort, mastering that Zen of assembly language is more
a matter of learning than of being taught. You will have to find your
own path of learning, although I will start you on your way with this
book. The subtle facts and examples I provide will help you gain the
necessary experience, but you must continue the journey on your own.
Each program you create will expand your programming horizons and
increase the options available to you in meeting the next challenge. The
ability of your mind to find surprising new and better ways to craft
superior code from a concept—the flexible mind, if you will—is the
linchpin of good assembler code, and you will develop this skill only by
doing.

Never underestimate the importance of the flexible mind. Good assembly
code is better than good compiled code. Many people would have you
believe otherwise, but they're wrong. That doesn't mean that high-level
languages are useless; far from it. High-level languages are the best
choice for the majority of programmers, and for the bulk of the code of
most applications. When the *best* code—the fastest or smallest code
possible—is needed, though, assembly is the only way to go.

Simple logic dictates that no compiler can know as much about what a
piece of code needs to do or adapt as well to those needs as the person
who wrote the code. Given that superior information and adaptability, an
assembly language programmer can generate better code than a compiler,
all the more so given that compilers are constrained by the limitations
of high-level languages and by the process of transformation from
high-level to machine language. Consequently, carefully optimized
assembly is not just the language of choice but the *only* choice for
the 1percent to 10 percent of code—usually consisting of small,
well-defined subroutines—that determines overall program performance,
and it is the only choice for code that must be as compact as possible,
as well. In the run-of-the-mill, non-time-critical portions of your
programs, it makes no sense to waste time and effort on writing
optimized assembly code—concentrate your efforts on loops and the like
instead; but in those areas where you need the finest code quality,
accept no substitutes.

Note that I said that an assembly programmer *can* generate better code
than a compiler, not *will* generate better code. While it is true that
good assembly code is better than good compiled code, it is also true
that bad assembly code is often much worse than bad compiled code; since
the assembly programmer has so much control over the program, he or she
has virtually unlimited opportunities to waste cycles and bytes. The
sword cuts both ways, and good assembly code requires more, not less,
forethought and planning than good code written in a high-level
language.

The gist of all this is simply that good assembly programming is done in
the context of a solid overall framework unique to each program, and the
flexible mind is the key to creating that framework and holding it
together.

#### Where to Begin? {#Heading9}

To summarize, the skill of assembly language optimization is a
combination of knowledge, perspective, and a way of thought that makes
possible the genesis of absolutely the fastest or the smallest code.
With that in mind, what should the first step be? Development of the
flexible mind is an obvious step. Still, the flexible mind is no better
than the knowledge at its disposal. The first step in the journey toward
mastering optimization at that exalted level, then, would seem to be
learning how to learn.