---
title: Michael Abrash's Graphics Programming Black Book, Special Edition
author: Michael Abrash
date: '1997-07-01'
isbn: '1576101746'
publisher: The Coriolis Group
category: 'Web and Software Development: Game Development,Web and Software Development:
  Graphics and Multimedia Development'
chapter: '04'
pages: 094-097
---

More than anything, the above rules mean using the registers as heavily
as possible, both because register-only instructions are short and
because they don't perform memory accesses to read or write operands.
However, using the registers is a rule of thumb, not a commandment. In
some circumstances, it may actually be *faster* to access memory. (The
look-up table technique is one such case.) What's more, the performance
of the prefetch queue (and hence the performance of each instruction)
differs from one code sequence to the next, and can even differ during
different executions of the *same* code sequence.

All in all, writing good assembler code is as much an art as a science.
As a result, you should follow the rules of thumb described here—and
then time your code to see how fast it really is. You should experiment
freely, but always remember that actual, measured performance is the
bottom line.

#### Holding Up the 8088 {#Heading14}

In this chapter I've taken you further and further into the depths of
the PC, telling you again and again that you must understand the
computer at the lowest possible level in order to write good code. At
this point, you may well wonder, "Have we gotten low enough?"

Not quite yet. The 8-bit bus and prefetch queue cycle-eaters are
low-level indeed, but we've one level yet to go. Dynamic RAM refresh and
wait states—our next topics—together form the lowest level at which the
hardware of the PC affects code performance. Below this level, the PC is
of interest only to hardware engineers.

Before we begin our discussion of dynamic RAM refresh, let's step back
for a moment to take an overall look at this lowest level of
cycle-eaters. In truth, the distinctions between wait states and dynamic
RAM refresh don't much matter to a programmer. What is important is that
you understand this: *Under certain circumstances, devices on the PC bus
can stop the CPU for 1 or more cycles, making your code run more slowly
than it seemingly should.*

Unlike all the cycle-eaters we've encountered so far, wait states and
dynamic RAM refresh are strictly external to the CPU, as was shown in
Figure 4.1. Adapters on the PC's bus, such as video and memory cards,
can insert wait states on any bus access, the idea being that they won't
be able to complete the access properly unless the access is stretched
out. Likewise, the channel of the DMA controller dedicated to dynamic
RAM refresh can request control of the bus at any time, although the CPU
must relinquish the bus before the DMA controller can take over. This
means that your code can't directly control wait states or dynamic RAM
refresh. However, code *can* sometimes be designed to minimize the
effects of these cycle-eaters, and even when the cycle-eaters slow your
code without there being a thing in the world you can do about it,
you're still better off understanding that you're losing performance and
knowing why your code doesn't run as fast as it's supposed to than you
were programming in ignorance.

Let's start with DRAM refresh, which affects the performance of every
program that runs on the PC.

### Dynamic RAM Refresh: The Invisible Hand {#Heading15}

Dynamic RAM (DRAM) refresh is sort of an act of God. By that I mean that
DRAM refresh invisibly and inexorably steals a certain fraction of all
available memory access time from your programs, when they are accessing
memory for code and data. (When they are accessing cache on more recent
processors, theoretically the DRAM refresh cycle-eater doesn't come into
play, but there are other cycle-eaters waiting to prey on cache-bound
programs.) While you *could* stop DRAM refresh, you wouldn't want to
since that would be a sure prescription for crashing your computer. In
the end, thanks to DRAM refresh, almost all code runs a bit slower on
the PC than it otherwise would, and that's that.

A bit of background: A static RAM (SRAM) chip is a memory chip that
retains its contents indefinitely so long as power is maintained. By
contrast, each of several blocks of bits in a dynamic RAM (DRAM) chip
retains its contents for only a short time after it's accessed for a
read or write. In order to get a DRAM chip to store data for an extended
period, each of the blocks of bits in that chip must be accessed
regularly, so that the chip's stored data is kept refreshed and valid.
So long as this is done often enough, a DRAM chip will retain its
contents indefinitely.

All of the PC's system memory consists of DRAM chips. Each DRAM chip in
the PC must be completely refreshed about once every four milliseconds
in order to ensure the integrity of the data it stores. Obviously, it's
highly desirable that the memory in the PC retain the correct data
indefinitely, so each DRAM chip in the PC *must* always be refreshed
within 4 µs of the last refresh. Since there's no guarantee that a given
program will access each and every DRAM block once every 4 µs, the PC
contains special circuitry and programming for providing DRAM refresh.

#### How DRAM Refresh Works in the PC {#Heading16}

On the original 8088-based IBM PC, timer 1 of the 8253 timer chip is
programmed at power-up to generate a signal once every 72 cycles, or
once every 15.08µs. That signal goes to channel 0 of the 8237 DMA
controller, which requests the bus from the 8088 upon receiving the
signal. (DMA stands for *direct memory access,* the ability of a device
other than the 8088 to control the bus and access memory directly,
without any help from the 8088.) As soon as the 8088 is between memory
accesses, it gives control of the bus to the 8237, which in conjunction
with special circuitry on the PC's motherboard then performs a single
4-cycle read access to 1 of 256 possible addresses, advancing to the
next address on each successive access. (The read access is only for the
purpose of refreshing the DRAM; the data that is read isn't used.)

The 256 addresses accessed by the refresh DMA accesses are arranged so
that taken together they properly refresh all the memory in the PC. By
accessing one of the 256 addresses every 15.08 µs, all of the PC's DRAM
is refreshed in 256 x 15.08 µs, or 3.86 µs, which is just about the
desired 4 µs time I mentioned earlier. (Only the first 640K of memory is
refreshed in the PC; video adapters and other adapters above 640K
containing memory that requires refreshing must provide their own DRAM
refresh in pre-AT systems.)

Don't sweat the details here. The important point is this: For at least
4 out of every 72 cycles, the original PC's bus is given over to DRAM
refresh and is not available to the 8088, as shown in Figure 4.5. That
means that as much as 5.56 percent of the PC's already inadequate bus
capacity is lost. However, DRAM refresh doesn't necessarily stop the
8088 in its tracks for 4 cycles. The Execution Unit of the 8088 can keep
processing while DRAM refresh is occurring, unless the EU needs to
access memory. Consequently, DRAM refresh can slow code performance
anywhere from 0 percent to 5.56 percent (and actually a bit more, as
we'll see shortly), depending on the extent to which DRAM refresh
occupies cycles during which the 8088 would otherwise be accessing
memory.

![](images/04-05.jpg)\
 **Figure 4.5**  *The PC bus dynamic RAM (DRAM) refresh.*