---
title: Michael Abrash's Graphics Programming Black Book, Special Edition
author: Michael Abrash
date: '1997-07-01'
isbn: '1576101746'
publisher: The Coriolis Group
category: 'Web and Software Development: Game Development,Web and Software Development:
  Graphics and Multimedia Development'
chapter: '11'
pages: 224-226
---

**LISTING 11.5 L11-5.ASM**

    ;
    ; *** Listing 11.5 ***
    ;
    ; Measures the performance of adding an immediate value
    ; to a memory variable, for comparison with Listing 11.4,
    ; which adds an immediate value to a register.
    ;
            jmp     Skip
    ;
            even            ;always make sure word-sized memory
                            ; variables are word-aligned!
    WordVar dw      0
    ;
    Skip:
            call    ZTimerOn
            rept    1000
            add     [WordVar]100h
            endm
            call    ZTimerOff

What's going on? Simply this: Instruction fetching is controlling
overall execution time on *both* processors. Both the 8088 in a PC and
the 286 in an AT can execute the bytes of the instructions in Listings
11.4 and 11.5 faster than they can be fetched. Since the instructions
are exactly the same lengths on both processors, it stands to reason
that the ratio of the overall execution times of the instructions should
be the same on both processors as well. Instruction length controls
execution time, and the instruction lengths are the sameâ€”therefore the
ratios of the execution times are the same. The 286 can both fetch and
execute instruction bytes faster than the 8088 can, so code executes
much faster on the 286; nonetheless, because the 286 can also execute
those instruction bytes much faster than it can fetch them, overall
performance is still largely determined by the size of the instructions.

Is this always the case? No. When the prefetch queue is full,
memory-accessing instructions on the 286 and 386 are much faster
(relative to register-only instructions) than they are on the 8088.
Given the system wait states prevalent on 286 and 386 computers,
however, the prefetch queue is likely to be empty quite a bit,
especially when code consisting of instructions with short EU execution
times is executed. Of course, that's just the sort of code we're likely
to write when we're optimizing, so the performance of high-speed code is
more likely to be controlled by instruction size than by EU execution
time on most 286 and 386 computers, just as it is on the PC.

All of which is just a way of saying that faster memory access and EA
calculation notwithstanding, it's just as desirable to keep instructions
short and memory accesses to a minimum on the 286 and 386 as it is on
the 8088. And the way to do that is to use the registers as heavily as
possible, use string instructions, use short forms of instructions, and
the like.

The more things change, the more they remain the same....

#### POPF and the 286 {#Heading17}

We've one final 286-related item to discuss: the hardware malfunction of
**POPF** under certain circumstances on the 286.

The problem is this: Sometimes **POPF** permits interrupts to occur when
interrupts are initially off and the setting popped into the Interrupt
flag from the stack keeps interrupts off. In other words, an interrupt
can happen even though the Interrupt flag is never set to 1. Now, I
don't want to blow this particular bug out of proportion. It only causes
problems in code that cannot tolerate interrupts under any
circumstances, and that's a rare sort of code, especially in user
programs. However, some code really does need to have interrupts
absolutely disabled, with no chance of an interrupt sneaking through.
For example, a critical portion of a disk BIOS might need to retrieve
data from the disk controller the instant it becomes available; even a
few hundred microseconds of delay could result in a sector's worth of
data misread. In this case, one misplaced interrupt during a **POPF**
could result in a trashed hard disk if that interrupt occurs while the
disk BIOS is reading a sector of the File Allocation Table.

There is a workaround for the **POPF** bug. While the workaround is easy
to use, it's considerably slower than **POPF**, and costs a few bytes as
well, so you won't want to use it in code that can tolerate interrupts.
On the other hand, in code that truly cannot be interrupted, you should
view those extra cycles and bytes as cheap insurance against mysterious
and erratic program crashes.

One obvious reason to discuss the **POPF** workaround is that it's
useful. Another reason is that the workaround is an excellent example of
Zen-level assembly coding, in that there's a well-defined goal to be
achieved but no obvious way to do so. The goal is to reproduce the
functionality of the **POPF** instruction without using **POPF**, and
the place to start is by asking exactly what **POPF** does.

All **POPF** does is pop the word on top of the stack into the FLAGS
register, as shown in Figure 11.4. How can we do that without **POPF**?
Of course, the 286's designers intended us to use **POPF** for this
purpose, and didn't intentionally provide any alternative approach, so
we'll have to devise an alternative approach of our own. To do that,
we'll have to search for instructions that contain some of the same
functionality as **POPF**, in the hope that one of those instructions
can be used in some way to replace **POPF**.