---
title: Michael Abrash's Graphics Programming Black Book, Special Edition
author: Michael Abrash
date: '1997-07-01'
isbn: '1576101746'
publisher: The Coriolis Group
category: 'Web and Software Development: Game Development,Web and Software Development:
  Graphics and Multimedia Development'
chapter: '12'
pages: 233-237
---

## Chapter 12\
 Pushing the 486 {#Heading1}

### It's Not Just a Bigger 386 {#Heading2}

So this traveling salesman is walking down a road, and he sees a group
of men digging a ditch with their bare hands. "Whoa, there!" he says.
"What you guys need is a Model 8088 ditch digger!" And he whips out a
trowel and sells it to them.

A few days later, he stops back around. They're happy with the trowel,
but he sells them the latest ditch-digging technology, the Model 80286
spade. That keeps them content until he stops by again with a Model
80386 shovel (a full 32 inches wide, with a narrow point to emulate the
trowel), and *that* holds them until he comes back around with what they
really need: a Model 80486 bulldozer.

Having reached the top of the line, the salesman doesn't pay them a call
for a while. When he does, not only are they none too friendly, but
they're digging with the 80386 shovel; the bulldozer is sitting off to
one side. "Why on earth are you using that shovel?" the salesman asks.
"Why aren't you digging with the bulldozer?"

"Well, Lord knows we tried," says the foreman, "but it was all we could
do just to lift the damn thing!"

Substitute "processor" for the various digging implements, and you get
an idea of just how different the optimization rules for the 486 are
from what you're used to. Okay, it's not quite *that* bad—but upon
encountering a processor where string instructions are often to be
avoided and memory-to-register `MOV`s are frequently as fast as
register-to-register `MOV`s, Dorothy was heard to exclaim (before she
sank out of sight in a swirl of hopelessly mixed metaphors), "I don't
think we're in Kansas anymore, Toto."

#### Enter the 486 {#Heading3}

No chip that is a direct, fully compatible descendant of the 8088, 286,
and 386 could ever be called a RISC chip, but the 486 certainly contains
RISC elements, and it's those elements that are most responsible for
making 486 optimization unique. Simple, common instructions are executed
in a single cycle by a RISC-like core processor, but other instructions
are executed pretty much as they were on the 386, where every
instruction takes at least 2 cycles. For example, `MOV AL, [TestChar]`
takes only 1 cycle on the 486, assuming both instruction and data are in
the cache—3 cycles faster than the 386—but `STOSB` takes 5 cycles, 1
cycle *slower* than on the 386. The floating-point execution unit inside
the 486 is also much faster than the 387 math coprocessor, largely
because, being in the same silicon as the CPU (the 486 has a math
coprocessor built in), it is more tightly coupled. The results are
sometimes startling: `FMUL` (floating point multiply) is usually
faster on the 486 than `IMUL` (integer multiply)!

An encyclopedic approach to 486 optimization would take a book all by
itself, so in this chapter I'm only going to hit the highlights of 486
optimization, touching on several optimization rules, some documented,
some not. You might also want to check out the following sources of 486
information: *i486 Microprocessor Programmer's Reference Manual,* from
Intel; "8086 Optimization: Aim Down the Middle and Pray," in the March,
1991 *Dr. Dobb's Journal*; and "Peak Performance: On to the 486," in the
November, 1990 *Programmer's Journal.*

### Rules to Optimize By {#Heading4}

In Appendix G of the *i486 Microprocessor Programmer*'*s* *Reference
Manual*, Intel lists a number of optimization techniques for the 486.
While neither exhaustive (we'll look at two undocumented optimizations
shortly) nor entirely accurate (we'll correct two of the rules here),
Intel's list is certainly a good starting point. In particular, the list
conveys the extent to which 486 optimization differs from optimization
for earlier x86 processors. Generally, I'll be discussing optimization
for real mode (it being the most widely used mode at the moment),
although many of the rules should apply to protected mode as well.

> ![](images/i.jpg)
> 486 optimization is generally more precise and less frustrating than
> optimization for other x86 processors because every 486 has an identical
> internal cache. Whenever both the instructions being executed and the
> data the instructions access are in the cache, those instructions will
> run in a consistent and calculatable number of cycles on all 486s, with
> little chance of interference from the prefetch queue and without regard
> to the speed of external memory.

In other words, for cached code (which time-critical code almost always
is), performance is predictable and can be calculated with good
precision, and those calculations will apply on any 486. However,
"predictable" doesn't mean "trivial"; the cycle times printed for the
various instructions are not the whole story. You must be aware of all
the rules, documented and undocumented, that go into calculating actual
execution times—and uncovering some of those rules is exactly what this
chapter is about.

#### The Hazards of Indexed Addressing {#Heading5}

Rule \#1: Avoid indexed addressing (that is, try not to use either two
registers or scaled addressing to point to memory).

Intel cautions against using indexing to address memory because there's
a one-cycle penalty for indexed addressing. True enough—but "indexed
addressing" might not mean what you expect.

Traditionally, SI and DI are considered the index registers of the x86
CPUs. That is not the sense in which "indexed addressing" is meant here,
however. In real mode, indexed addressing means that two registers,
rather than one or none, are used to point to memory. (In this context,
the use of one register to address memory is "base addressing," no
matter what register is used.) `MOV AX, [BX+DI]` and `MOV CL,
[BP+SI+10]` perform indexed addressing; `MOV AX,[BX]` and `MOV DL,
[SI+1]` do not.

> ![](images/i.jpg)
> Therefore, in real mode, the rule is to avoid using two registers to
> point to memory whenever possible. Often, this simply means adding the
> two registers together outside a loop before memory is actually
> addressed.

As an example, you might adhere to this rule by replacing the code

```nasm
LoopTop:
    add  ax,[bx+si]
    add  si,2
    dec  cx
    jnz  LoopTop
```

with this

```nasm
    add  si,bx
LoopTop:
    add  ax,[si]
    add  si,2
    dec  cx
    jnz  LoopTop
    sub  si,bx
```
