Table 14.1 represents a limited and decidedly unscientific comparison of
searching techniques. Nonetheless, the overall trend is clear: For all
but the shortest patterns, well-implemented Boyer-Moore is generally as
good as or better than—sometimes *much* better than—brute-force
searching. (For short patterns, you might want to use **REPNZ SCASB,**
thereby getting the best of both worlds.)

Know your data and use your smarts. Don't stop thinking just because
you're implementing a big-name algorithm; you know more than it does.

### Further Optimization of Boyer-Moore {#Heading6}

We can do substantially better yet than Listing 14.3 if we're willing to
accept tighter limits on the data. Limiting the length of the
searched-for pattern to a maximum of 255 bytes allows us to use the
**XLAT** instruction and generally tighten the critical loop. (Be aware,
however, that **XLAT** is a relatively expensive instruction on the 486
and Pentium.) Putting a copy of the searched-for string at the end of
the search buffer as a sentinel, so that the search never fails, frees
us from counting down the buffer length, and makes it easy to unroll the
critical loop. Listing 14.4, which implements these optimizations, is
about 60 percent faster than Listing 14.3.

**LISTING 14.4 L14-4.ASM**

    ; Searches a buffer for a specified pattern. In case of a mismatch,
    ; uses the value of the mismatched byte to skip across as many
    ; potential match locations as possible (partial Boyer-Moore).
    ; Returns start offset of first match searching forward, or NULL if
    ; no match is found.
    ; Requires that the pattern be no longer than 255 bytes, and that
    ; there be a match for the pattern somewhere in the buffer (ie., a
    ; copy of the pattern should be placed as a sentinel at the end of
    ; the buffer if the pattern isn't already known to be in the buffer).
    ; Tested with TASM.
    ; C near-callable as:
    ; unsigned char * FindString(unsigned char * BufferPtr,
    ; unsigned int BufferLength, unsigned char * PatternPtr,
    ; unsigned int PatternLength);

    parms   struc
            dw      2 dup(?)    ;pushed BP & return address
    BufferPtr dw    ?           ;pointer to buffer to be searched
    BufferLength dw ?           ;# of bytes in buffer to be searched
                                ; (not used, actually)
    PatternPtr dw   ?           ;pointer to pattern for which to search
                                ; (pattern *MUST* exist in the buffer)
    PatternLength dw ?          ;length of pattern for which to search (must
                                ; be <= 255)
    parms   ends

            .model small
            .code
            public _FindString
    _FindString     proc    near
            cld
            push    bp          ;preserve caller's stack frame
            mov     bp,sp       ;point to our stack frame
            push    si          ;preserve caller's register variables
            push    di
            sub     sp,256      ;allocate space for SkipTable
    ; Create the table of distances by which to skip ahead on mismatches
    ; for every possible byte value. First, initialize all skips to the
    ; pattern length; this is the skip distance for bytes that don't
    ; appear in the pattern.
            mov     di,ds
            mov     es,di        ;ES=DS=SS
            mov     di,sp        ;point to SkipBuffer
            mov     al,byte ptr [bp+PatternLength]
            and     al,al        ;return an instant match if the pattern is
            jz      InstantMatch ; 0-length
            mov     ah,al
            mov     cx,256/2
            rep     stosw
            mov     ax,[bp+PatternLength]
            dec     ax                       ;from now on, we only need
            mov     [bp+PatternLength],ax    ; PatternLength - 1
    ; Point to rightmost byte of first potential pattern match location
    ; in buffer.
            add     [bp+BufferPtr],ax
    ; Set the skip values for the bytes that do appear in the pattern to
    ; the distance from the byte location to the end of the pattern.
            mov     si,[bp+PatternPtr] ;point to start of pattern
            and     ax,ax       ;are there any skips to set?
            jz      SetSkipDone ;no
            mov     di,sp       ;point to SkipBuffer
            sub     bx,bx       ;prepare for word addressing off byte value
    SetSkipLoop:
            mov     bl,[si]     ;get the next pattern byte
            inc     si          ;advance the pattern pointer
            mov     [di+bx],al  ;set the skip value when this byte value is
                                ;the mismatch value in the buffer
            dec     ax
            jnz     SetSkipLoop
    SetSkipDone:
            mov     dl,[si]       ;DL=rightmost pattern byte from now on
            dec     si            ;point to next-to-rightmost byte of pattern
            mov     [bp+PatternPtr],si ; from now on
    ; Search the buffer.
            std                       ;for backward REPZ CMPSB
            mov     di,[bp+BufferPtr] ;point to the first search location
            mov     bx,sp             ;point to SkipTable for XLAT
    SearchLoop:
            sub     ah,ah   ;used to convert AL to a word
    ; Skip through until there's a match for the first pattern byte.
    QuickSearchLoop:
    ; See if we have a match at the first buffer location.
            REPT    8           ;unroll loop 8 times to reduce branching
            mov     al,[di]     ;next buffer byte
            cmp     dl,al       ;does it match the pattern?
            jz      FullCompare ;yes, so keep going
            xlat                ;no, look up the skip value for this mismatch
            add     di,ax       ;BufferPtr += Skip;
            ENDM
            jmp     QuickSearchLoop
    ; Return a pointer to the start of the buffer (for 0-length pattern).
            align   2
    InstantMatch:
            mov     ax,[bp+BufferPtr]
            jmp     short Done
    ; Compare the pattern and the buffer location, searching from high
    ; memory toward low (right to left).
            align   2
    FullCompare:
            mov     [bp+BufferPtr],di ;save the current buffer location
            mov     cx,[bp+PatternLength] ;# of bytes yet to compare
            jcxz    Match   ;done if there was only one character
            dec     di      ;point to next destination byte to compare (SI
                            ; points to next-to-rightmost source byte)
            repz    cmpsb   ;compare the rest of the pattern
            jz      Match   ;that's it; we've found a match
    ; It's a mismatch; let's see what we can learn from it.
            inc     di      ;compensate for 1-byte overrun of REPZ CMPSB;
                            ; point to mismatch location in buffer
    ; # of bytes that did match.
            mov     si,[bp+BufferPtr]
            sub     si,di
    ; If, based on the mismatch character, we can't even skip ahead as far
    ; as where we started this particular comparison, then just advance by
    ; 1 to the next potential match; otherwise, skip ahead from this
    ; comparison location by the skip distance for the mismatch character,
    ; less the distance covered by the partial match.
            mov     al,[di] ;get the value of the mismatch byte in buffer
            xlat               ;get the skip value for this mismatch
            mov     cx,1       ;assume we'll just advance to the next
                               ; potential match location
            sub     ax,si      ;is the skip far enough to be worth taking?
            jna     MoveAhead  ;no, go with the default advance of 1
            mov     cx,ax      ;yes, this is the distance to skip ahead from
                               ;the last potential match location checked
    MoveAhead:
    ; Skip ahead and perform the next comparison.
            mov     di,[bp+BufferPtr]
            add     di,cx              ;BufferPtr += Skip;
            mov     si,[bp+PatternPtr] ;point to the next-to-rightmost
                                       ; pattern byte
            jmp     SearchLoop
    ; Return start of match in buffer (BufferPtr - (PatternLength - 1)).
            align   2
    Match:
            mov     ax,[bp+BufferPtr]
            sub     ax,[bp+PatternLength]
    Done:
            cld             ;restore default direction flag
            add     sp,256  ;deallocate space for SkipTable
            pop     di      ;restore caller's register variables
            pop     si
            pop     bp      ;restore caller's stack frame
            ret
    _FindString     endp
            end

Note that Table 14.1 includes the time required to build the skip table
each time **FindString** is called. This time could be eliminated for
all but the first search when repeatedly searching for a particular
pattern, by building the skip table externally and passing a pointer to
it as a parameter.

### Know What You Know {#Heading7}

Here we've turned up our nose at a repeated string instruction, we've
gone against the grain by comparing backward, and yet we've speeded up
our code quite a bit. All this without any restrictions or special
requirements (excluding Listing 14.4)—and without any new information.
Everything we needed was sitting there all along; we just needed to
think to look at it.

As Yogi Berra might put it, "You don't know what you know until you know
it."