  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](13-04.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](14-02.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

Chapter 14\
 Boyer-Moore String Searching {#Heading1}
-----------------------------

### Optimizing a Pretty Optimum Search Algorithm {#Heading2}

When you seem to be stumped, stop for a minute and *think.* All the
information you need may be right in front of your nose if you just look
at things a little differently. Here's a case in point:

When I was in college, I used to stay around campus for the summer. Oh,
I'd take a course or two, but mostly it was an excuse to hang out and
have fun. In that spirit, my girlfriend, Adrian (*not* my future wife,
partly for reasons that will soon become apparent), bussed in to spend a
week, sharing a less-than-elegant \$150 per month apartment with me and,
by necessity, my roommate.

Our apartment was pretty much standard issue for two male college
students; maybe even a cut above. The dishes were usually washed, there
was generally food in the refrigerator, and nothing larger than a small
dog had taken up permanent residence in the bathroom. However, there was
one sticking point (literally): the kitchen floor. This floor—standard
tile, with a nice pattern of black lines on an off-white background (or
so we thought)—had never been cleaned. By which I mean that I know for a
certainty that *we* had never cleaned it, but I suspect that it had in
fact not been cleaned since the Late Jurassic, or possibly earlier. Our
feet tended to stick to it; had the apartment suddenly turned
upside-down, I think we'd all have been hanging from the ceiling.

One day, my roommate and I returned from a pick-up basketball game.
Adrian, having been left to her own devices for a couple of hours, had
apparently kept herself busy. "Notice anything?" she asked, with an edge
to her voice that suggested we had damned well better.

"Uh, you cooked dinner?" I guessed. "Washed the dishes? Had your hair
done?" My roommate was equally without a clue.

She stamped her foot (really; the only time I've ever seen it happen),
and said, "No, you jerks! The kitchen floor! Look at the floor! I
cleaned it!"

The floor really did look amazing. It was actually all white; the black
lines had been grooves filled with dirt. We assured her that it looked
terrific, it just wasn't that obvious until you knew to look for it;
anyone would tell you that it wasn't the kind of thing that jumped out
at you, but it really was great, no kidding. We had almost smoothed
things over, when a friend walked in, looked around with a start, and
said, "Hey! Did you guys put in a new floor?"

As I said, sometimes everything you need to know is right in front of
your nose. Which brings us to Boyer-Moore string searching.

### String Searching Refresher {#Heading3}

I've discussed string searching earlier in this book, in Chapters 5 and
9. You may want to refer back to these chapters for some background on
string searching in general. I'm also going to use some of the code from
that chapter as part of this chapter's test suite. For further
information, you may want to refer to the discussion of string searching
in the excellent *Algorithms in C,* by Robert Sedgewick
(Addison-Wesley), which served as the primary reference for this
chapter. (If you look at Sedgewick, be aware that in the Boyer-Moore
listing on page 288, there is a mistake: "j \> 0" in the **for** loop
should be "j \>= 0," unless I'm missing something.)

String searching is the simple matter of finding the first occurrence of
a particular sequence of bytes (the pattern) within another sequence of
bytes (the buffer). The obvious, brute-force approach is to try every
possible match location, starting at the beginning of the buffer and
advancing one position after each mismatch, until either a match is
found or the buffer is exhausted. There's even a nifty string
instruction, **REPZ CMPS,** that's perfect for comparing the pattern to
the contents of the buffer at each location. What could be simpler?

We have some important information that we're not yet using, though.
Typically, the buffer will contain a wide variety of bytes. Let's assume
that the buffer contains text, in which case there will be dozens of
different characters; and although the distribution of characters won't
usually be even, neither will any one character constitute half the
buffer, or anything close. A reasonable conclusion is that the first
character of the pattern will rarely match the first character of the
buffer location currently being checked. This allows us to use the
speedy **REPNZ SCASB** to whiz through the buffer, eliminating most
potential match locations with single repetitions of **SCASB.** Only
when that first character does (infrequently) match must we drop back to
the slower **REPZ CMPS** approach.

It's important to understand that we're assuming that the buffer is
typical text. That's what I meant at the outset, when I said that the
information you need may be under your nose.

  ------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](images/i.jpg)   *Formally, you don't know a blessed thing about the search buffer, but experience, common sense, and your knowledge of the application give you a great deal of useful, if somewhat imprecise, information.*
  ------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If the buffer contains the letter ‘A' repeated 1,000 times, followed by
the letter ‘B,' then the **REPNZ SCASB/REPZ CMPS** approach will be much
slower than the brute-force **REPZ CMPS** approach when searching for
the pattern "AB," because **REPNZ SCASB** would match at every buffer
location. You could construct a horrendous worst-case scenario for
almost any good optimization; the key is understanding the usual
conditions under which your code will work.

As discussed in Chapter 9, we also know that certain characters have
lower probabilities of matching than others. In a normal buffer, ‘T'
will match far more often than ‘X.' Therefore, if we use **REPNZ SCASB**
to scan for the least common letter in the search string, rather than
the first letter, we'll greatly decrease the number of times we have to
drop back to **REPZ CMPS,** and the search time will become very close
to the time it takes **REPNZ SCASB** to go from the start of the buffer
to the match location. If the distance to the first match is N bytes,
the least-common **REPNZ SCASB** approach will take about as long as N
repetitions of **REPNZ SCASB.**

At this point, we're pretty much searching at the speed of **REPNZ
SCASB.** On the x86, there simply is no faster way to test each
character in turn. In order to get any faster, we'd have to check fewer
characters—but we can't do that and still be sure of finding all
matches. Can we?

Actually, yes, we can.

  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](13-04.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](14-02.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

* * * * *

Graphics Programming Black Book © 2001 Michael Abrash
