  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](17-04.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](17-06.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

In Listing 17.3, note the padded cellmap edges, and the alteration of
the member functions to compensate for the padding. Also note that the
width now has to be a multiple of eight, to facilitate the process of
copying the edges to the opposite padding bytes. We have decreased the
generality of our Game of Life implementation in exchange for better
performance. That's a very common trade-off, as common as trading memory
for performance. As a rule, the more general a program is, the slower it
is. A corollary is that often (not always, but often), the more heavily
optimized a program is, the more complex and the more difficult to
implement it is. You can often improve performance a good deal by
implementing only the level of generality you need, but at the same time
decreased generality makes it more difficult to change or port the
program at some later date. A Game of Life implementation, such as
Listing 17.1, that's built on **set\_cell()**, **clear\_cell()**, and
**get\_cell()** is completely general; you can change the cell storage
format simply by changing the constructor and those three functions.
Listing 17.3 is harder to change because **count\_neighbors()** would
also have to be altered, and it's more complex than any of the other
functions.

So, in Listing 17.3, we've gotten under the hood and changed the cellmap
format a little, and gotten impressive results. But now
**count\_neighbors()** is hard-wired for optimized counting, and it's
still taking up more than half the time. Maybe now it's time to go to
assembly?

Not hardly.

### Heavy-Duty C++ Optimization {#Heading7}

Before we get to assembly, we still have to perform C++ optimization,
then see if we can find an alternative approach that better fits the
application. It would actually have made much more sense if we had
looked for a new approach as our first optimization step, but I decided
it would be better to cover straightforward C++ optimizations at this
point, and the mind-bending stuff a little later. Right now, let's look
at some C++ optimizations; Listing 17.4 is a C++-optimized version of
Listing 17.3.

**LISTING 17.4 L17-4.CPP**

    /* next_generation(), implemented using fast, all-in-one hard-wired
       neighbor count/update/draw function. Otherwise, the same as
       Listing 17.3. */

    /* Calculates the next generation of current_map and stores it in
       next_map. */
    void cellmap::next_generation(cellmap& next_map)
    {
       unsigned int x, y, neighbor_count;
       unsigned int width_in_bytesX2 = width_in_bytes << 1;
       unsigned char *cell_ptr, *current_cell_ptr, mask, current_mask;
       unsigned char *base_cell_ptr, *row_cell_ptr, base_mask;
       unsigned char *dest_cell_ptr = next_map.cells;

       // Process all cells in the current cellmap
       row_cell_ptr = cells;      // point to upper left neighbor of
                                  // first cell in cell map
       for (y=0; y<height; y++) { // repeat for each row of cells
          // Cell pointer and cell bit mask for first cell in row
          base_cell_ptr = row_cell_ptr; // to access upper left neighbor
          base_mask = 0x01;             // of first cell in row
          for (x=0; x<width; x++) {     // repeat for each cell in row
             // First, count neighbors
             // Point to upper left neighbor of current cell
             cell_ptr = base_cell_ptr;  // pointer and bit mask for
             mask = base_mask;          // upper left neighbor
             // Count upper left neighbor
             neighbor_count = (*cell_ptr & mask) ? 1 : 0;
             // Count left neighbor
             if ((*(cell_ptr + width_in_bytes) & mask)) neighbor_count++;
             // Count lower left neighbor
             if ((*(cell_ptr + width_in_bytesX2) & mask))
    neighbor_count++;
             // Point to upper neighbor
             if ((mask >>= 1) == 0) {
                mask = 0x80;
                cell_ptr++;
             }
             // Remember where to find the current cell
             current_cell_ptr = cell_ptr + width_in_bytes;
             current_mask = mask;
             // Count upper neighbor
             if ((*cell_ptr & mask)) neighbor_count++;
             // Count lower neighbor
             if ((*(cell_ptr + width_in_bytesX2) & mask))
                   neighbor_count++;
             // Point to upper right neighbor
             if ((mask >>= 1) == 0) {
                mask = 0x80;
                cell_ptr++;
             }
             // Count upper right neighbor
             if ((*cell_ptr & mask)) neighbor_count++;
             // Count right neighbor
             if ((*(cell_ptr + width_in_bytes) & mask))  neighbor_count++;
             // Count lower right neighbor
             if ((*(cell_ptr + width_in_bytesX2) & mask))
                   neighbor_count++;
             if (*current_cell_ptr & current_mask) {
                if ((neighbor_count != 2) && (neighbor_count != 3)) {
                   *(dest_cell_ptr + (current_cell_ptr - cells)) &=
                         ~current_mask;    // turn off cell
                   draw_pixel(x, y, OFF_COLOR);
                }
             } else {
                if (neighbor_count == 3) {
                   *(dest_cell_ptr + (current_cell_ptr - cells)) |=
                         current_mask;     // turn on cell
                   draw_pixel(x, y, ON_COLOR);
                }
             }
             // Advance to the next cell on row
             if ((base_mask >>= 1) == 0) {
                base_mask = 0x80;
                base_cell_ptr++;  // advance to the next cell byte
             }
          }
          row_cell_ptr += width_in_bytes;  // point to start of next row
       }
    }

Listing 17.4 and Listing 17.3 are functionally the same; the only
difference lies in how **next\_generation()** is implemented. (Only
**next\_generation()** is shown in Listing 17.4; the program is
otherwise identical to Listing 17.3.) Listing 17.4 applies the following
optimizations to **next\_generation()**:

The neighbor-counting code is brought into **next\_generation,**
eliminating many function calls and from-scratch address/mask
calculations; all multiplies are eliminated by using pointers and
addition; and all cells are accessed directly via pointers and masks,
eliminating all remaining function calls and from-scratch address/mask
calculations.

The net effect of these optimizations is that Listing 17.4 is more than
twice as fast as Listing 17.3; we've achieved the desired 18 generations
per second, albeit only on a 486, and only at 96x96. (The **\#define**
that enables code limiting the speed to 18 Hz, which seemed ridiculous
in Listing 17.1, is actually useful for keeping the generations from
iterating too quickly when Listing 17.4 is running on a 486, especially
with a small cellmap like 48x48.) We've sped things up by about eight
times so far; we need to increase our speed another ten times to reach
our goal of 200x200 at 18 generations per second on a 20 MHz 386.

It's undoubtedly possible to improve the performance of Listing 17.4
further by fine-tuning the code, but no tremendous improvement is
possible that way.

  ------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](images/i.jpg)   *Once you've reached the point of fine-tuning pointer usage and register variables and the like in C or C++, you've become compiler-dependent; you therefore might as well go to assembly and get the real McCoy.*
  ------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](17-04.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](17-06.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

* * * * *

Graphics Programming Black Book Â© 2001 Michael Abrash
