  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](18-05.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](19-02.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

Chapter 19\
 Pentium: Not the Same Old Song {#Heading1}
-------------------------------

### Learning a Whole Different Set of Optimization Rules {#Heading2}

I can still remember the day I did my first 8088 programming. I had just
moved over from the distantly related Z80, so the 8088 wasn't totally
alien, but it was nonetheless an incredibly exciting processor. The
8088's instruction set was vastly more powerful and varied than the
Z80's, and as someone who thrives on puzzles of all sorts, from
crosswords to Freecell to jigsaws to assembly language optimization, I
was delighted to find that the 8088 made the optimization universe an
order of magnitude more complicated—and correspondingly more
interesting.

Well, the years went by and the Z80 just died, and 8088 optimization got
ever more complex and intriguing as I discovered the hazards of the
8088's cycle-eaters. By the time 1989 rolled around, I had written *Zen
of Assembly Language*, in which I described all that I had learned about
the 8088 and concluded that 8088 optimization was a black art of
infinite subtlety. Unfortunately, by that time the 286 was the standard,
with the 386 coming on strong, and if the 286 was less amenable to hand
optimization than the 8088 (and it surely was), then the 386 was
downright unfriendly. Sure, assembly optimization could buy some
performance on the 386, but only 20, 30, 40 percent or so—a far cry from
the 100 to 400 percent of the 8088. At the same time, compiler
technology was improving quickly, and the days of hand tuning seemed
numbered.

Happily, the 486 traveled to the beat of a different drum. The 486 had
some interesting internal pipeline hazards, as well as an internal cache
that made cycle counting more meaningful than ever before, and careful
code massaging sometimes yielded startling results. Nonetheless, the 486
was still too simple to mark a return to the golden age of optimization.

### The Return of Optimization as Art {#Heading3}

Then the Pentium came around, and filled our code with optimization
hazards, and life was good again. The Pentium has two execution
pipelines and enough rules and exceptions to those rules to bring joy to
the heart of the hardest-core assembly junkie. For a change, Intel
documented most of the Pentium optimization rules and spread the word
about them, so we don't have to go through as much spelunking of the
Pentium as with its predecessors. They've done this, I suspect, largely
because more than any previous x86 processor, the Pentium's performance
is highly dependent on properly optimized code.

In the worst case, where the second execution pipe is dormant most of
the time, the Pentium won't perform all that much better than a 486 at
the same clock speed. In the best case, where the second pipe is heavily
used and the Pentium's other advantages (such as branch prediction,
write-back cache, 64-bit full speed external bus, and dual 8K caches)
can kick in, the Pentium can be more than twice as fast as a 486. In a
critical inner loop, hand optimization can double or even triple
performance over 486-optimized code—and that's on top of the sorts of
algorithmic and design optimizations that are routinely performed on any
processor. Good compilers can make a big difference on the Pentium, too,
but there are some gotchas there, to which I'll return later.

It's been a long time coming, but hard-core, big-payoff assembly
language optimization is back in style, and for the rest of this book
I'll be delving into the Byzantine wonders of the Pentium. In this
chapter, I'll do a quick overview, then cover a variety of smaller
Pentium optimization topics. In the next chapter, I'll tackle the
900-pound gorilla of Pentium optimization: superscalar (dual execution
pipe) programming. Trust me, this'll be fun.

Listen, do you want to know a secret? This lead-in has been brought to
you with the help of "classic rock"—another way of saying "music Baby
Boomers listened to back when they cared more about music than 401Ks and
regular flossing." There are so many of us Boomers that our music, even
the worst of it, will never go away. When we're 90 years old, propped up
in our Kraftmatic adjustable beds and surfing the 5,000-channel
information superhighway from one infomercial to the next, the sound
system in the retirement community will be piping in a Muzak version of
"Louie, Louie," while on the holovid Country Joe McDonald and the Fish
pitch Preparation H. I can hardly wait.

Gimme a "P"....

### The Pentium: An Overview {#Heading4}

Architecturally, the Pentium is vastly different in many ways from the
486, but most of those differences are transparent to programmers. After
all, the whole idea behind the Pentium is that it runs the same code as
previous x86 processors, but faster; otherwise, Intel could have made a
faster, cheaper RISC processor. Still, knowledge of the Pentium's
architecture is useful for understanding exactly how code will perform,
and a few of the architectural differences are most decidedly *not*
transparent to performance programmers.

The Pentium is essentially one full 486 execution unit (EU), plus a
second stripped-down 486 EU, on a single chip. The first EU is referred
to as the U execution pipe, or *U-pipe;* the second, more limited one is
called the *V-pipe*. The two pipes are capable of executing instructions
simultaneously, have separate write buffers, and can even access the
data cache simultaneously (although with certain limitations that I'll
discuss in the next chapter), so on the Pentium it is possible to
execute two instructions, even instructions that access memory, in a
single clock. The cycle times for instruction execution in a given pipe
(both pipes process instructions at the same speed) are comparable to
those for the 486, although some instructions—notably **MUL**, the
repeated string instructions, and some of the shifts and rotates—have
gotten faster.

My first thought upon hearing of the Pentium's dual pipes was to wonder
how often the prefetch queue stalls for lack of instruction bytes, given
that the demand for instruction bytes can be twice that of the 486. The
answer is: rarely indeed, and then only because the code is not in the
internal cache. The 486 has a single 8K cache that stores both code and
data, and prefetching can stall if data fetching doesn't allow time for
prefetching to occur (although this rarely happens in practice).

  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](18-05.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](19-02.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

* * * * *

Graphics Programming Black Book © 2001 Michael Abrash
