  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](21-03.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](21-05.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

The first, obvious thing we can do to Listing 21.1 is change **ADC
AX,0** to **ADC EAX,0**, eliminating a prefix byte and saving a full
cycle. Now we're down from five to four cycles. What next?

Listing 21.2 shows one interesting alternative that doesn't really buy
us anything. Here, we've eliminated all size prefixes by doing
byte-sized **MOVs** and **ADDs**, but because the size prefix on **ADD
AX,[ESI]**, for whatever reason, didn't cost anything in Listing 21.1,
our efforts are to no avail—Listing 21.2 still takes 4 cycles per
checksummed word. What's worth noting about Listing 21.2 is the extent
to which the code is broken into simple instructions and reordered so as
to avoid size prefixes, register contention, AGIs, and data bank
conflicts (the latter because both **[ESI]** and **[ESI+1]** are in the
same cache data bank, as discussed in the last chapter).

**LISTING 21.2 L21-2.ASM**

    ; Calculates TCP/IP (16-bit carry-wrapping) checksum for buffer
    ;  starting at ESI, of length ECX words.
    ; Returns checksum in AX.
    ; High word of EAX, DX, ECX and ESI destroyed.
    ; All cycle counts assume 32-bit protected mode.
    ; Assumes buffer length > 0.

            sub     eax,eax         ;initialize the checksum
            mov     dx,[esi]        ;first word to checksum
            dec     ecx             ;we'll do 1 checksum outside the loop
            jz      short ckloopend ;only 1 checksum to do
            add     esi,2           ;point to the next word to checksum

    ckloop:
            add     al,dl           ;cycle 1 U-pipe
            mov     dl,[esi]        ;cycle 1 V-pipe
            adc     ah,dh           ;cycle 2 U-pipe
            mov     dh,[esi+1]      ;cycle 2 V-pipe
            adc     eax,0           ;cycle 3 U-pipe
            add     esi,2           ;cycle 3 V-pipe
            dec     ecx             ;cycle 4 U-pipe
            jnz     ckloop          ;cycle 4 V-pipe

    ckloopend:
            add     ax,dx           ;checksum the last word
            adc     eax,0

Listing 21.3 is a more sophisticated attempt to speed up the checksum
calculation. Here we see a hallmark of Pentium optimization: two
operations (the checksumming of the current and next pair of words)
interleaved together to allow both pipes to run at near maximum
capacity. Another hallmark that's apparent in Listing 21.3 is that
Pentium-optimized code tends to use more registers and require more
instructions than 486-optimized code. Again, note the careful mixing of
byte-sized reads to avoid AGIs, register contention, and cache bank
collisions, in particular the way in which the byte reads of memory are
interspersed with the additions to avoid register contention, and the
placement of **ADD ESI,4** to avoid an AGI.

**LISTING 21.3 L21-3.ASM**

    ; Calculates TCP/IP (16-bit carry-wrapping) checksum for buffer
    ;  starting at ESI, of length ECX words.
    ; Returns checksum in AX.
    ; High word of EAX, BX, EDX, ECX and ESI destroyed.
    ; All cycle counts assume 32-bit protected mode.
    ; Assumes buffer length > 0.

            sub     eax,eax            ;initialize the checksum
            sub     edx,edx            ;prepare for later ORing
            shr     ecx,1              ;we'll do two words per loop
            jnc     short ckloopsetup  ;even number of words
            mov     ax,[esi]           ;do the odd word
            jz      short ckloopdone   ;no more words to checksum
            add     esi,2              ;point to the next word
    ckloopsetup:
            mov     dx,[esi]           ;load most of 1st word to
            mov     bl,[esi+2]         ; checksum (last byte loaded in loop)
            dec     ecx                ;any more dwords to checksum?
            jz    short ckloopend      ;no

    ckloop:
            mov     bh,[esi+3]      ;cycle 1 U-pipe
            add     esi,4           ;cycle 1 V-pipe
            shl     ebx,16          ;cycle 2 U-pipe
                                    ;cycle 2 V-pipe idle
                                    ; (register contention)
            or      ebx,edx         ;cycle 3 U-pipe
            mov     dl,[esi]        ;cycle 3 V-pipe
            add     eax,ebx         ;cycle 4 U-pipe
            mov     bl,[esi+2]      ;cycle 4 V-pipe
            adc     eax,0           ;cycle 5 U-pipe
            mov     dh,[esi+1]      ;cycle 5 V-pipe
            dec     ecx             ;cycle 6 U-pipe
            jnz     ckloop          ;cycle 6 V-pipe

    ckloopend:
            mov     bh,[esi+3]      ;checksum the last dword
               add   ax,dx
               adc   ax,bx
               adc   ax,0

            mov         edx,eax         ;compress the 32-bit checksum
            shr         edx,16          ; into a 16-bit checksum
            add         ax,dx
            adc         eax,0
    ckloopdone:

The checksum loop in Listing 21.3 takes longer than the loop in Listing
21.2, at 6 cycles versus 4 cycles for Listing 21.2—but Listing 21.3 does
two checksum operations in those 6 cycles, so we've cut the time per
checksum addition from 4 to 3 cycles. You might think that this small an
improvement doesn't justify the additional complexity of Listing 21.3,
but it is a one-third speedup, well worth it if this is a critical
loop—and, in general, if it isn't critical, there's no point in
hand-tuning it. That's why I haven't bothered to try to optimize the
non-inner-loop code in Listing 21.3; it's only executed once per
checksum, so it's unlikely that a cycle or two saved there would make
any real-world difference.

Listing 21.3 could be made a bit faster yet with some loop unrolling,
but that would make the code quite a bit more complex for relatively
little return. Instead, why not make the code more complex and get a
*big* return? Listing 21.4 does exactly that by loading one dword at a
time to eliminate both the word prefix of Listing 21.1 and the multiple
byte-sized accesses of Listing 21.3. An obvious drawback to this is the
considerable complexity needed to ensure that the dword accesses are
dword-aligned (remember that unaligned dword accesses cost three cycles
each), and to handle buffer lengths that aren't dword multiples. I've
handled these problems by requiring that the buffer be dword-aligned and
a dword multiple in length, which is of course not always the case in
the real world. However, the point of these listings is to illustrate
Pentium optimization—dword issues, being non-inner-loop stuff, are
solvable details that aren't germane to the main focus. In any case, the
complexity and assumptions are well justified by the performance of this
code: three cycles per loop, or 1.5 cycles per checksummed word, more
than three times the speed of the original code. Again, note that the
actual order in which the instructions are arranged is dictated by the
various optimization hazards of the Pentium.

  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](21-03.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](21-05.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

* * * * *

Graphics Programming Black Book © 2001 Michael Abrash
