---
title: Michael Abrash's Graphics Programming Black Book, Special Edition
author: Michael Abrash
date: '1997-07-01'
isbn: '1576101746'
publisher: The Coriolis Group
category: 'Web and Software Development: Game Development,Web and Software Development:
  Graphics and Multimedia Development'
chapter: '25'
pages: 472-474
---

**LISTING 25.2 L25-2.ASM**

    ; Program to illustrate operation of Map Mask register when drawing
    ;  to memory that already contains data.
    ; By Michael Abrash.
    ;
    stack   segment para stack ‘STACK'
            db      512 dup(?)
    stack   ends
    ;
    EGA_VIDEO_SEGMENT       equ     0a000h  ;EGA display memory segment
    ;
    ; EGA register equates.
    ;
    SC_INDEX        equ     3c4h    ;SC index register
    SC_MAP_MASK     equ     2       ;SC map mask register
    ;
    ; Macro to set indexed register INDEX of SC chip to SETTING.
    ;
    SETSC   macro   INDEX, SETTING
            mov     dx,SC_INDEX
            mov     al,INDEX
            out     dx,al
            inc     dx
            mov     al,SETTING
            out     dx,al
            dec     dx
            endm
    ;
    cseg    segment para public ‘CODE#146;
            assume  cs:cseg
    start   proc    near
    ;
    ; Select 640x480 graphics mode.
    ;
            mov     ax,012h
            int     10h
    ;
            mov     ax,EGA_VIDEO_SEGMENT
            mov     es,ax                   ;point to video memory
    ;
    ; Draw 24 10-scan-line high horizontal bars in green, 10 scan lines apart.
    ;
            SETSC   SC_MAP_MASK,02h         ;map mask setting enables only
                                            ; plane 1, the green plane
            sub     di,di           ;start at beginning of video memory
            mov     al,0ffh
            mov     bp,24           ;# bars to draw
    HorzBarLoop:
            mov     cx,80*10        ;# bytes per horizontal bar
            rep stosb               ;draw bar
            add     di,80*10        ;point to start of next bar
            dec     bp
            jnz     HorzBarLoop
    ;
    ; Fill screen with blue, using Map Mask register to enable writes
    ; to blue plane only.
    ;
            SETSC   SC_MAP_MASK,01h         ;map mask setting enables only
                                            ; plane 0, the blue plane
            sub     di,di
            mov     cx,80*480               ;# bytes per screen
            mov     al,0ffh
            rep stosb                       ;perform fill (affects only
                                            ; plane 0, the blue plane)
    ;
    ; Wait for a keystroke.
    ;
            mov     ah,1
            int     21h
    ;
    ; Restore text mode.
    ;
            mov     ax,03h
            int     10h
    ;
    ; Exit to DOS.
    ;
            mov     ah,4ch
            int     21h
    start   endp
    cseg    ends
            end     start

#### Setting All Planes to a Single Color {#Heading6}

The set/reset circuitry can be used to force some planes to 0-bits and
others to 1-bits during a single write, while letting CPU data go to
still other planes, and so provides an efficient way to set all planes
to a desired color. The set/reset circuitry works as follows:

For each of the bits 0-3 in the Enable Set/Reset register (Graphics
Controller register 1) that is 1, the corresponding bit in the Set/Reset
register (GC register 0) is extended to a byte (0 or 0FFH) and replaces
the CPU data for the corresponding plane. For each of the bits in the
Enable Set/Reset register that is 0, the CPU data is used unchanged for
that plane (normal operation). For example, if the Enable Set/Reset
register is set to 01H and the Set/Reset register is set to 05H, then
the CPU data is replaced for plane 0 only (the blue plane), and the
value it is replaced with is 0FFH (bit 0 of the Set/Reset register
extended to a byte). Note that in this case, bits 1-3 of the Set/Reset
register have no effect.

It is important to understand that the set/reset circuitry directly
replaces CPU data in Graphics Controller data flow. Refer back to Figure
25.3 to see that the output of the set/reset circuitry passes through
(and may be transformed by) the ALU and the bit mask before being
written to memory, and even then the Map Mask register must enable the
write. When using set/reset, it is generally desirable to set the Map
Mask register to enable all planes the set/reset circuitry is
controlling, since those memory planes which are disabled by the Map
Mask register cannot be modified, and the purpose of enabling set/reset
for a plane is to force that plane to be set by the set/reset circuitry.

Listing 25.3 illustrates the use of set/reset to force a specific color
to be written. This program is the same as that of Listing 25.2, except
that set/reset rather than the Map Mask register is used to control
color. The preexisting pattern is completely overwritten this time,
because the set/reset circuitry writes 0-bytes to planes that must be
off as well as 0FFH-bytes to planes that must be on.
