  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](27-03.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](27-05.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

### When to Use Write Mode 2 and When to Use Set/Reset {#Heading7}

As indicated earlier, write mode 2 and set/reset are functionally
interchangeable. Write mode 2 lends itself to more efficient
implementations when the drawing color changes frequently, as in Listing
27.2.

Set/reset tends to be superior when many pixels in succession are drawn
in the same color, since with set/reset enabled for all planes the
Set/Reset register provides the color data and as a result the CPU is
free to draw whatever byte value it wishes. For example, the CPU can
execute an **OR** instruction to display memory when set/reset is
enabled for all planes, thus both loading the latches and writing the
color value with a single instruction, secure in the knowledge that the
value it writes is ignored in favor of the set/reset color.

Set/reset is also the mode of choice whenever it is necessary to force
the value written to some planes to a fixed value while allowing the CPU
byte to modify other planes. This is the mode of operation when
set/reset is enabled for some but not all planes.

### Mode 13H—320x200 with 256 Colors {#Heading8}

I’m going to take a minute—and I do mean a minute—to discuss the
programming model for mode 13H, the VGA’s 320x200 256-color mode.
Frankly, there’s just not much to it, especially compared to the
convoluted 16-color model that we’ve explored over the last five
chapters. Mode 13H offers the simplest programming model in the history
of PC graphics: A linear bitmap starting at A000:0000, consisting of
64,000 bytes, each controlling one pixel. The byte at offset 0 controls
the upper left pixel on the screen, the byte at offset 319 controls the
upper right pixel on the screen, the byte at offset 320 controls the
second pixel down at the left of the screen, and the byte at offset
63,999 controls the lower right pixel on the screen. That’s all there is
to it; it’s so simple that I’m not going to spend any time on a demo
program, especially given that some of the listings later in this book,
such as the antialiasing code in Chapter F on the companion CD-ROM, use
mode 13H.

### Flipping Pages from Text to Graphics and Back {#Heading9}

A while back, I got an interesting letter from Phil Coleman, of La
Jolla, who wrote:

“Suppose I have the EGA in mode 10H (640x350 16-color graphics). I would
like to preserve some or all of the image while I temporarily switch to
text mode 3 to give my user a ‘Help’ screen. Naturally memory is scarce
so I’d rather not make a copy of the video buffer at A000H to ‘remember’
the image while I digress to the Help text. The EGA BIOS says that the
screen memory will not be cleared on a mode set if bit 7 of AL is set.
Yet if I try that, it is clear that writing text into the B800H buffer
trashes much more than the 4K bytes of a text page; when I switch back
to mode 10H, “ghosts” appear in the form of bands of colored dots. (When
in text mode, I do make a copy of the 4K buffer at B800H before showing
the help; and I restore the 4K before switching back to mode 10H.) Is
there a way to preserve the graphics image while I switch to text
mode?’’

“A corollary to this question is: Where does the 64/128/256K of EGA
memory ‘hide’ when the EGA is in text mode? Some I guess is used to
store character sets, but what happens to the rest? Or rather, how can I
protect it?”

Those are good questions. Alas, answering them in full would require
extensive explanation that would have little general application, so I’m
not going to do that. However, the issue of how to go to text mode and
back without losing the graphics image certainly rates a short
discussion, complete with some working code. That’s especially true
given that both the discussion and the code apply just as well to the
VGA as to the EGA (with a few differences in mode 12H, the VGA’s
highmode, as noted below).

Phil is indeed correct in his observation that setting bit 7 of AL
instructs the BIOS not to clear display memory on mode sets, and he is
also correct in surmising that a font is loaded when going to text mode.
The normal mode 10H bitmap occupies the first 28,000 bytes of each of
the VGA’s four planes. (The mode 12H bitmap takes up the first 38,400
bytes of each plane.) The normal mode 3 character/attribute memory map
resides in the first 4000 bytes of planes 0 and 1 (the blue and green
planes in mode 10H). The standard font in mode 3 is stored in the first
8K of plane 2 (the red plane in mode 10H). Neither mode 3 nor any other
text mode makes use of plane 3 (the intensity plane in mode 10H); if
necessary, plane 3 could be used as scratch memory in text mode.

Consequently, you can get away with saving a total of just under 16K
bytes—the first 4000 bytes of planes 0 and 1 and the first 8K bytes of
plane 2—when going from mode 10H or mode 12H to mode 3, to be restored
on returning to graphics mode.

That’s hardly all there is to the matter of going from text to graphics
and back without bitmap corruption, though. One interesting point is
that the mode 10H bitmap can be relocated to A000:8000 simply by doing a
mode set to mode 10H and setting the start address (programmed at CRT
Controller registers 0CH and 0DH) to 8000H. You can then access display
memory starting at A800:8000 instead of the normal A000:0000, with the
resultant display exactly like that of normal mode 10H. There are BIOS
issues, since the BIOS doesn’t automatically access display memory at
the new start address, but if your program does all its drawing directly
without the help of the BIOS, that’s no problem.

The mode 12H bitmap can’t start at A000:8000, because it’s so long that
it would run off the end of display memory. However, the mode 12H bitmap
can be relocated to, say, A000:6000, where it would fit without
conflicting with the default font or the normal text mode memory map,
although it would overlap two of the upper pages available for use (but
rarely used) by text-mode programs.

At any rate, once the graphics mode bitmap is relocated, flipping to
text mode and back becomes painless. The memory used by mode 3 doesn’t
overlap the relocated mode 10H bitmap at all (unless additional portions
of font memory are loaded), so all you need do is set bit 7 of AL on
mode sets in order to flip back and forth between the two modes.

  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](27-03.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](27-05.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

* * * * *

Graphics Programming Black Book © 2001 Michael Abrash
