---
title: Michael Abrash's Graphics Programming Black Book, Special Edition
author: Michael Abrash
date: '1997-07-01'
isbn: '1576101746'
publisher: The Coriolis Group
category: 'Web and Software Development: Game Development,Web and Software Development:
  Graphics and Multimedia Development'
chapter: '28'
pages: 523-526
---

## Chapter 28\
 Reading VGA Memory {#Heading1}

### Read Modes 0 and 1, and the Color Don't Care Register {#Heading2}

Well, it's taken five chapters, but we've finally covered the data write
path and all four write modes of the VGA. Now it's time to tackle the
VGA's two read modes. While the read modes aren't as complex as the
write modes, they're nothing to sneeze at. In particular, read mode 1
(also known as color compare mode) is rather unusual and not at all
intuitive.

You may well ask, isn't *anything* about programming the VGA
straightforward? Well...no. But then, clearing up the mysteries of VGA
programming is what this part of the book is all about, so let's get
started.

### Read Mode 0 {#Heading3}

Read mode 0 is actually relatively uncomplicated, given that you
understand the four-plane nature of the VGA. (If you don't understand
the four-plane nature of the VGA, I strongly urge you to read Chapters
23-27 before continuing with this chapter.) Read mode 0, the read mode
counterpart of write mode 0, lets you read from one (and only one) plane
of VGA memory at any one time.

Read mode 0 is selected by setting bit 3 of the Graphics Mode register
(Graphics Controller register 5) to 0. When read mode 0 is active, the
plane that supplies the data when the CPU reads VGA memory is the plane
selected by bits 1 and 0 of the Read Map register (Graphics Controller
register 4). When the Read Map register is set to 0, CPU reads come from
plane 0 (the plane that normally contains blue pixel data). When the
Read Map register is set to 1, CPU reads come from plane 1; when the
Read Map register is 2, CPU reads come from plane 2; and when the Read
Map register is 3, CPU reads come from plane 3.

That all seems simple enough; in read mode 0, the Read Map register acts
as a selector among the four planes, determining which one of the planes
will supply the value returned to the CPU. There is a slight
complication, however, in that the value written to the Read Map
register in order to read from a given plane is not the same as the
value written to the Map Mask register (Sequence Controller register 2)
in order to write to that plane.

Why is that? Well, in read mode 0, one and only one plane can be read at
a time, so there are only four possible settings of the Read Map
register: 0, 1, 2, or 3, to select reads from plane 0, 1, 2, or 3. In
write mode 0, by contrast (in fact, in any write mode), any or all
planes may be written to at once, since the byte written by the CPU can
"fan out" to multiple planes. Consequently, there are not four but
sixteen possible settings of the Map Mask register. The setting of the
Map Mask register to write only to plane 0 is 1; to write only to plane
1 is 2; to write only to plane 2 is 4; and to write only to plane 3 is
8.

As you can see, the settings of the Read Map and Map Mask registers for
accessing a given plane don't match. The code in Listing 28.1
illustrates this. Listing 28.1 simply copies a sixteen-color image from
system memory to VGA memory, one plane at a time, then animates by
repeatedly copying the image back to system memory, again one plane at a
time, clearing the old image, and copying the image to a new location in
VGA memory. Note the differing settings of the Read Map and Map Mask
registers.
