---
title: Michael Abrash's Graphics Programming Black Book, Special Edition
author: Michael Abrash
date: '1997-07-01'
isbn: '1576101746'
publisher: The Coriolis Group
category: 'Web and Software Development: Game Development,Web and Software Development:
  Graphics and Multimedia Development'
chapter: '29'
pages: 539-545
---

## Chapter 29\
 Saving Screens and Other VGA Mysteries {#Heading1}

### Useful Nuggets from the VGA Zen File {#Heading2}

There are a number of VGA graphics topics that aren't quite involved
enough to warrant their own chapters, yet still cause a fair amount of
programmer headscratching—and thus deserve treatment somewhere in this
book. This is the place, and during the course of this chapter we'll
touch on saving and restoring 16-color EGA and VGA screens, the
16-out-of-64 colors issue, and techniques involved in reading and
writing VGA control registers.

That's a lot of ground to cover, so let's get started!

### Saving and Restoring EGA and VGA Screens {#Heading3}

The memory architectures of EGAs and VGAs are similar enough to treat
both together in this regard. The basic principle for saving EGA and VGA
16-color graphics screens is astonishingly simple: Write each plane to
disk separately. Let's take a look at how this works in the EGA's hi-res
mode 10H, which provides 16 colors at 640x350.

All we need do is enable reads from plane 0 and write the 28,000 bytes
of plane 0 that are displayed in mode 10H to disk, then enable reads
from plane 1 and write the displayed portion of that plane to disk, and
so on for planes 2 and 3. The result is a file that's 112,000 (28,000 \*
4) bytes long, with the planes stored as four distinct 28,000-byte
blocks, as shown in Figure 29.1.

The program shown later on in Listing 29.1 does just what I've described
here, putting the screen into mode 10H, putting up some bittext so there
is something to save, and creating the 112K file SNAPSHOT.SCR, which
contains the visible portion of the mode 10H frame buffer.

![**Figure 29.1**  *Saving EGA/VGA display memory.*](images/29-01.jpg)

The only part of Listing 29.1 that's even remotely tricky is the use of
the Read Map register (Graphics Controller register 4) to make each of
the four planes of display memory readable in turn. The same code is
used to write 28,000 bytes of display memory to disk four times, and
28,000 bytes of memory starting at A000:0000 are written to disk each
time; however, a different plane is read each time, thanks to the
changing setting of the Read Map register. (If this is unclear, refer
back to Figure 29.1; you may also want to reread Chapter 28 to brush up
on the operation of the Read Map register in particular and reading EGA
and VGA memory in general.)

Of course, we'll want the ability to restore what we've saved, and
Listing 29.2 does this. Listing 29.2 reverses the action of Listing
29.1, selecting mode 10H and then loading 28,000 bytes from SNAPSHOT.SCR
into each plane of display memory. The Map Mask register (Sequence
Controller register 2) is used to select the plane to be written to. If
your computer is slow enough, you can see the colors of the text change
as each plane is loaded when Listing 29.2 runs. Note that Listing 29.2
does not itself draw any text, but rather simply loads the bit map saved
by Listing 29.1 back into the mode 10H frame buffer.

**LISTING 29.1 L29-1.ASM**

    ; Program to put up a mode 10h EGA graphics screen, then save it
    ; to the file SNAPSHOT.SCR.
    ;
    VGA_SEGMENT                 equ   0a000h
    GC_INDEX                    equ   3ceh             ;Graphics Controller Index register
    READ_MAP                    equ   4                ;Read Map register index in GC
    DISPLAYED_SCREEN_SIZE       equ  (640/8)*350       ;# of displayed bytes per plane in a
                                                       ; hi-res graphics screen
    ;
    stack      segment para stack ‘STACK'
                     db                  512 dup (?)
    stack      ends
    ;
    Data       segment     word ‘DATA'
    SampleText       db    ‘This is bit-mapped text, drawn in hi-res '
                     db    ‘EGA graphics mode 10h.', 0dh, 0ah, 0ah
                     db    ‘Saving the screen (including this text)...'
                     db    0dh, 0ah, ‘$'
    Filename         db    ‘SNAPSHOT.SCR',0   ;name of file we're saving to
    ErrMsg1          db    ‘*** Couldn't open SNAPSHOT.SCR ***',0dh,0ah,‘$'
    ErrMsg2          db    ‘*** Error writing to SNAPSHOT.SCR ***',0dh,0ah,‘$'
    WaitKeyMsg       db    0dh, 0ah, ‘Done. Press any key to end...',0dh,0ah,‘$'
    Handle           dw    ?                           ;handle of file we're saving to
    Plane            db    ?                           ;plane being read
    Data  ends
    ;
    Code           segment
                   assume   cs:Code, ds:Data
    Start          proc     near
                   mov      ax,Data
                   mov      ds,ax
    ;
    ; Go to hi-res graphics mode.
    ;
                   mov      ax,10h     ;AH = 0 means mode set, AL = 10h selects
                                       ; hi-res graphics mode
                   int      10h        ;BIOS video interrupt
    ;
    ; Put up some text, so the screen isn't empty.
    ;
                   mov      ah,9       ;DOS print string function
                   mov      dx,offset SampleText
                   int      21h
    ;
    ; Delete SNAPSHOT.SCR if it exists.
    ;
                   mov      ah,41h     ;DOS unlink file function
                   mov      dx,offset Filename
                   int      21h
    ;
    ; Create the file SNAPSHOT.SCR.
    ;
                   mov      ah,3ch        ;DOS create file function
                   mov      dx,offset Filename
                   sub      cx,cx         ;make it a normal file
                   int      21h
                   mov      [Handle],ax   ;save the handle
                   jnc      SaveTheScreen ;we're ready to save if no error
                   mov      ah,9          ;DOS print string function
                   mov      dx,offset ErrMsg1
                   int      21h           ;notify of the error
                   jmp      short Done    ;and done
    ;
    ; Loop through the 4 planes, making each readable in turn and
    ; writing it to disk. Note that all 4 planes are readable at
    ; A000:0000; the Read Map register selects which plane is readable
    ; at any one time.
    ;
    SaveTheScreen:
                   mov      [Plane],0;start with plane 0
    SaveLoop:
                   mov      dx,GC_INDEX
                   mov      al,READ_MAP;set GC Index to Read Map register
                   out      dx,al
                   inc      dx
                   mov      al,[Plane]          ;get the # of the plane we want
                                                ; to save
                   out      dx,al               ;set to read from the desired plane
                   mov      ah,40h              ;DOS write to file function
                   mov      bx,[Handle]
                   mov      cx,DISPLAYED_SCREEN_SIZE ;# of bytes to save
                   sub      dx,dx               ;write all displayed bytes at A000:0000
                   push     ds
                   mov      si,VGA_SEGMENT
                   mov      ds,si
                   int      21h                 ;write the displayed portion of this plane
                   pop      ds
                   cmp      ax,DISPLAYED_SCREEN_SIZE ;did all bytes get written?
                   jz       SaveLoopBottom
                   mov      ah,9                ;DOS print string function
                   mov      dx,offset ErrMsg2
                   int      21h                 ;notify about the error
                   jmp      short DoClose       ;and done
    SaveLoopBottom:
                   mov      al,[Plane]
                   inc      ax                  ;point to the next plane
                   mov      [Plane],al
                   cmp      al,3                ;have we done all planes?
                   jbe      SaveLoop            ;no, so do the next plane
    ;
    ; Close SNAPSHOT.SCR.
    ;
    DoClose:
                   mov      ah,3eh              ;DOS close file function
                   mov      bx,[Handle]
                   int      21h
    ;
    ; Wait for a keypress.
    ;
                   mov      ah,9                ;DOS print string function
                   mov      dx,offset WaitKeyMsg
                   int      21h                 ;prompt
                   mov      ah,8                ;DOS input without echo function
                   int      21h
    ;
    ; Restore text mode.
    ;
                   mov      ax,3
                   int      10h
    ;
    ; Done.
    ;
    Done:
                   mov      ah,4ch;DOS terminate function
                   int      21h
    Start          endp
    Code           ends
                   end      Start
