---
title: Michael Abrash's Graphics Programming Black Book, Special Edition
author: Michael Abrash
date: '1997-07-01'
isbn: '1576101746'
publisher: The Coriolis Group
category: 'Web and Software Development: Game Development,Web and Software Development:
  Graphics and Multimedia Development'
chapter: '30'
pages: 582-584
---

### Notes on Setting and Reading Registers {#Heading10}

There are a few interesting points regarding setting and reading
registers to be made about Listing 30.2. First, bit 5 of the AC Index
register should be set to 1 whenever palette RAM is not being set (which
is to say, all the time in your code, because palette RAM should
normally be set via the BIOS). When bit 5 is 0, video data from display
memory is no longer sent to palette RAM, and the screen becomes a solid
colorâ€”not normally a desirable state of affairs.

Recall also that the AC Index and Data registers are both written to at
I/O address 3C0H, with the toggle that determines which one is written
to at any time switching state on every write to 3C0H; this toggle is
reset to index mode by each read from the Input Status 0 register (3DAH
in color modes, 3BAH in monochrome modes). The AC Index and Data
registers can also be written to at 3C1H on the EGA, but not on the VGA,
so steer clear of that practice.

On the VGA, reading AC registers is a bit different from writing to
them. The AC Data register can be read from 3C0H, and the AC register
currently addressed by the AC Index register can be read from 3C1H;
reading does not affect the state of the AC index/data toggle. Listing
30.2 illustrates reading from and writing to the AC registers. Finally,
setting the start address registers (CRTC registers 0CH and 0DH) has its
complications. As with the split screen registers, the start address
registers must be set together and without interruption at a time when
there's no chance of a partial setting being used for a frame. However,
it's a little more difficult to know when that might be the case with
the start address registers than it was with the split screen registers,
because it's not clear when the start address is used.

You see, the start address is loaded into the EGA's or VGA's internal
display memory pointer once per frame. The internal pointer is then
advanced, byte-by-byte and line-by-line, until the end of the frame
(with a possible resetting to zero if the split screen line is reached),
and is then reloaded for the next frame. That's straightforward enough;
the real question is, *Exactly when is the start address loaded?*

In his excellent book *Programmer's Guide to PC Video Systems*
(Microsoft Press) Richard Wilton says that the start address is loaded
at the start of the vertical sync pulse. (Wilton calls it vertical
retrace, which can also be taken to mean vertical non-display time, but
given that he's testing the vertical sync status bit in the Input Status
0 register, I assume he means that the start address is loaded at the
start of vertical sync.) Consequently, he waits until the *end* of the
vertical sync pulse to set the start address registers, confident that
the start address won't take effect until the next frame.

I'm sure Richard is right when it comes to the real McCoy IBM VGA and
EGA, but I'm less confident that every clone out there loads the start
address at the start of vertical sync.

> ![](images/i.jpg)
> For that very reason, I generally advise people not to use horizontal
> smooth panning unless they can test their software on all the makes of
> display adapter it might run on. I've used Richard's approach in
> Listings 30.1 and 30.2, and so far as I've seen it works fine, but be
> aware that there are potential, albeit unproven, hazards to relying on
> the setting of the start address registers to occur at a specific time
> in the frame.

The interaction of the start address registers and the Pel Panning
register is worthy of note. After waiting for the end of vertical sync
to set the start address in Listing 30.2, I wait for the start of the
*next* vertical sync to set the Pel Panning register. That's because the
start address doesn't take effect until the start of the next frame, but
the pel panning setting takes effect at the start of the next line; if
we set the pel panning at the same time we set the start address, we'd
get a whole frame with the old start address and the new pel panning
settings mixed together, causing the screen to jump. As with the split
screen registers, it's safest to set the Pel Panning register during
non-display time. For maximum reliability, we'd have interrupts off from
the time we set the start address registers to the time we change the
pel planning setting, to make sure an interrupt doesn't come in and
cause us to miss the start of a vertical sync and thus get a mismatched
pel panning/start address pair for a frame, although for modularity I
haven't done this in Listing 30.2. (Also, doing so would require
disabling interrupts for much too long a time.)

What if you wanted to pan faster? Well, you could of course just move
two pixels at a time rather than one; I assure you no one will ever
notice when you're panning at a rate of 10 or more times per second.
