### Split Screen and Panning {#Heading8}

Back in Chapter 23, I presented a program that performed smooth
horizontal panning. Smooth horizontal panning consists of two parts:
byte-by-byte (8-pixel) panning by changing the start address and
pixel-by-pixel intrabyte panning by setting the Pel Panning register (AC
register 13H) to adjust alignment by 0 to 7 pixels. (IBM prefers its own
jargon and uses the word "pel" instead of "pixel" in much of their
documentation, hence "pel panning." Then there's DASD, a.k.a. Direct
Access Storage Device—IBM-speak for hard disk.)

Horizontal smooth panning works just fine, although I've always harbored
some doubts that any one horizontal-smooth-panning approach works
properly on all display board clones. (More on this later.) There's a
catch when using horizontal smooth panning with the split screen up,
though, and it's a serious catch: You can't byte-pan the split screen
(which always starts at offset zero, no matter what the setting of the
start address registers)—but you *can* pel-pan the split screen.

Put another way, when the normal portion of the screen is horizontally
smooth-panned, the split screen portion moves a pixel at a time until
it's time to move to the next byte, then jumps back to the start of the
current byte. As the top part of the screen moves smoothly about, the
split screen will move and jump, move and jump, over and over. Believe
me, it's not a pretty sight.

  ------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](images/i.jpg)   *What's to be done? On the EGA, nothing. Unless you're willing to have your users' eyes doing the jitterbug, don't use horizontal smooth scrolling while the split screen is up. Byte panning is fine—just don't change the Pel Panning register from its default setting.*
  ------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

On the VGA, there is recourse. A VGA-only bit, bit 5 of the AC Mode
Control register (AC register 10H), turns off pel panning in the split
screen. In other words, when this bit is set to 1, pel panning is reset
to zero before the first line of the split screen, and remains zero
until the end of the frame. This doesn't allow you to pan the split
screen horizontally, mind you—there's no way to do that—but it does let
you pan the normal screen while the split screen stays rock-solid. This
can be used to produce an attractive "streaming tape" effect in the
normal screen while the split screen is used to display non-moving
information.

#### The Split Screen and Horizontal Panning: An Example {#Heading9}

Listing 30.2 illustrates the interaction of horizontal smooth panning
with the split screen, as well as the suppression of pel panning in the
split screen. Listing 30.2 creates a virtual screen 1024 pixels across
by setting the Offset register (CRTC register 13H) to 64, sets the
normal screen to scan video data beginning far enough up in display
memory to leave room for the split screen starting at offset zero, turns
on the split screen, and fills in the normal screen and split screen
with distinctive patterns. Next, Listing 30.2 pans the normal screen
horizontally without setting bit 5 of the AC Mode Control register to 1.
As you'd expect, the split screen jerks about quite horribly. After a
key press, Listing 30.2 sets bit 5 of the Mode Control register and pans
the normal screen again. This time, the split screen doesn't budge an
inch—*if* the code is running on a VGA.

By the way, if **IS\_VGA** is set to 0 in Listing 30.2, the program will
assemble in a form that will run on the EGA and *only* the EGA. Pel
panning suppression in the split screen won't work in this version,
however, because the EGA lacks the capability to support that feature.
When the EGA version runs, the split screen simply jerks back and forth
during both panning sessions.
