---
title: Michael Abrash's Graphics Programming Black Book, Special Edition
author: Michael Abrash
date: '1997-07-01'
isbn: '1576101746'
publisher: The Coriolis Group
category: 'Web and Software Development: Game Development,Web and Software Development:
  Graphics and Multimedia Development'
chapter: '36'
pages: 684-687
---

The run-length slice algorithm rotates matters 90 degrees, with
salubrious results. The basis of the run-length slice algorithm is
stepping one pixel at a time along the minor axis (the shorter
dimension), while maintaining an integer error term indicating how close
the line is to advancing an extra pixel along the major axis, as
illustrated by Figure 36.2.

Consider this: When you're called upon to draw a line with an
X-dimension of 35 and a Y-dimension of 10, you have a great deal of
information available, some of which is ignored by standard Bresenham's.
In particular, because the slope is between 1/3 and 1/4, you know that
every single run—a *run* being a set of pixels at the same minor-axis
coordinate—must be either three or four pixels long. No other length is
possible, as shown in Figure 36.3 (apart from the first and last runs,
which are special cases that I'll discuss shortly). Therefore, for this
line, there's no need to perform an error-term calculation and test for
each pixel. Instead, we can just perform one test per run, to see
whether the run is three or four pixels long, thereby eliminating about
70 percent of the calculations in drawing this line.

Take a moment to let the idea behind run-length slice drawing soak in.
Periodic decisions must be made to control pixel placement. The key to
speed is to make those decisions as infrequently and as quickly as
possible. Of course, it will work to make a decision at each
pixel—that's standard Bresenham's. However, most of those per-pixel
decisions are redundant, and in fact we have enough information before
we begin drawing to know which are the redundant decisions. Run-length
slice drawing is exactly equivalent to standard Bresenham's, but it
pares the decision-making process down to a minimum. It's somewhat
analogous to the difference between finding the greatest common divisor
of two numbers using Euclid's algorithm and finding it by trying every
possible divisor. Both approaches produce the desired result, but that
which takes maximum advantage of the available information and minimizes
redundant work is preferable.

![**Figure 36.2**  *Run-length slice line drawing.*](images/36-02.jpg)

![**Figure 36.3**  *Runs in a slope 1/3.5 line.*](images/36-03.jpg)

### Run-Length Slice Implementation {#Heading4}

We know that for any line, a given run will always be one of two
possible lengths. How, though, do we know which length to select?
Surprisingly, this is easy to determine. For the following discussion,
assume that we have a slope of 1/3.5, so that X is the major axis;
however, the discussion also applies to Y-major lines, with X and Y
reversed.

The minimum possible length for any run in an X-major line is
**int(XDelta/YDelta)**, where **XDelta** is the X-dimension of the line
and **YDelta** is the Y-dimension. The maximum possible length is
**int(XDelta/YDelta)+ 1**. The trick, then, is knowing which of these
two lengths to select for each run. To see how we can make this
selection, refer to Figure 36.4. For each one-pixel step along the minor
axis (Y, in this case), we advance at least three pixels. The full
advance distance along X (the major axis) is actually three-plus pixels,
because there is also a fractional portion to the advance along X for a
single-pixel Y step. This fractional advance is the key to deciding when
to add an extra pixel to a run. The fraction indicates what portion of
an extra pixel we advance along X (the major axis) during each run. If
we keep a running sum of the fractional parts, we have a measure of how
close we are to needing an extra pixel; when the fractional sum reaches
1, it's time to add an extra pixel to the current run. Then, we can
subtract 1 from the running sum (because we just advanced one pixel),
and continue on.

![**Figure 36.4**  *How the error term determines run length.*](images/36-04.jpg)

Practically speaking, however, we can't work with fractions because
floating-point arithmetic is slow and fixed-point arithmetic is
imprecise. Therefore, we take a cue from standard Bresenham's and scale
all the error-term calculations up so that we can work with integers.
The fractional X (major axis) advance per one-pixel Y (minor axis)
advance is the fractional portion of **XDelta/YDelta**. This value is
exactly equivalent **to (XDelta % YDelta)/YDelta**. We'll scale this up
by multiplying it by **YDelta\*2**, so that the amount by which we
adjust the error term up for each one-pixel minor-axis advance is
**(XDelta % YDelta)\*2**.

We'll similarly scale up the one pixel by which we adjust the error term
down after it turns over, so our downward error-term adjustment is
**YDelta\*2**. Therefore, before drawing each run, we'll add **(XDelta %
YDelta)\*2** to the error term. If the error term runs over (reaches one
full pixel), we'll lengthen the run by 1, and subtract **YDelta\*2**
from the error term. (All values are multiplied by 2 so that the initial
error term, which involves a 0.5 term, can be scaled up to an integer,
as discussed next.)

This is not a complicated process; it involves only integer addition and
subtraction and a single test, and it lends itself to many and varied
optimizations. For example, you could break out hardwired optimizations
for drawing each possible pair of run lengths. For the aforementioned
line with a slope of 1/3.5, for example, you could have one routine
hardwired to blast in a run of three pixels as quickly as possible, and
another hardwired to blast in a run of four pixels. These routines would
ideally have no looping, but rather just a series of instructions
customized to draw the desired number of pixels at maximum speed. Each
routine would know that the only possibilities for the length of the
next run would be three and four, so they could increment the error
term, then jump directly to the appropriate one of the two routines
depending on whether the error term turned over. Properly implemented,
it should be possible to reduce the average per-run overhead of line
drawing to less than one branch, with only two additions and two tests
(the number of runs must also be counted down), plus a subtraction half
the time. On a 486, this amounts to something on the order of 150
nanoseconds of overhead per pixel, exclusive of the time required to
actually write the pixel to display memory.

That's good.
