Chapter 36\
 The Good, the Bad, and the Run-Sliced {#Heading1}
--------------------------------------

### Faster Bresenham Lines with Run-Length Slice Line Drawing {#Heading2}

Years ago, I worked at a company that asked me to write blazingly fast
line-drawing code for an AutoCAD driver. I implemented the basic
Bresenham's line-drawing algorithm; streamlined it as much as possible;
special-cased horizontal, diagonal, and vertical lines; broke out
separate, optimized routines for lines in each octant; and massively
unrolled the loops. When I was done, I had line drawing down to a mere
five or six instructions per pixel, and I handed the code over to the
AutoCAD driver person, content in the knowledge that I had pushed the
theoretical limits of the Bresenham's algorithm on the 80x86
architecture, and that this was as fast as line drawing could get on a
PC. That feeling lasted for about a week, until Dave Miller, who these
days is a Windows display-driver whiz at Engenious Solutions, casually
mentioned Bresenham's faster run-length slice line-drawing algorithm.

Remember Bill Murray's safety tip in *Ghostbusters*? It goes something
like this. Harold Ramis tells the Ghostbusters not to cross the beams of
the antighost guns. "Why?" Murray asks.

"It would be bad," Ramis says.

Murray says, "I'm fuzzy on the whole good/bad thing. What exactly do you
mean by ‘bad'?" It turns out that what Ramis means by bad is basically
the destruction of the universe.

"Important safety tip," Murray comments dryly.

I learned two important safety tips from my line-drawing experience;
neither involves the possible destruction of the universe, so far as I
know, but they are nonetheless worth keeping in mind. First, never,
never, never think you've written the fastest possible code. Odds are,
you haven't. Run your code past another good programmer, and he or she
will probably say, "But why don't you do this?" and you'll realize that
you could indeed do that, and your code would then be faster. Or relax
and come back to your code later, and you may well see another, faster
approach. There are a million ways to implement code for any task, and
you can almost always find a faster way if you need to.

Second, when performance matters, never have your code perform the same
calculation more than once. This sounds obvious, but it's astonishing
how often it's ignored. For example, consider this snippet of code:

    for (i=0; i<RunLength; i++)
    {
       *WorkingScreenPtr = Color;
       if (XDelta > 0)
       {
          WorkingScreenPtr++;
       }
       else
       {
          WorkingScreenPtr--;
       }
    }

Here, the programmer knows which way the line is going before the main
loop begins—but nonetheless performs that test every time through the
loop, when calculating the address of the next pixel. Far better to
perform the test only once, outside the loop, as shown here:

    if (XDelta > 0)
    {
       for (i=0; i<RunLength; i++)
       {
          *WorkingScreenPtr++ = Color;
       }
    }
    else
    {
       for (i=0; i<RunLength; i++)
       {
          *WorkingScreenPtr-- = Color;
       }
    }

Think of it this way: A program is a state machine. It takes a set of
inputs and produces a corresponding set of outputs by passing through a
set of states. Your primary job as a programmer is to implement the
desired state machine. Your additional job as a performance programmer
is to minimize the lengths of the paths through the state machine. This
means performing as many tests and calculations as possible outside the
loops, so that the loops themselves can do as little work—that is, pass
through as few states—as possible.

Which brings us full circle to Bresenham's run-length slice line-drawing
algorithm, which just happens to be an excellent example of a minimized
state machine. In case you're fuzzy on the good/bad performance thing,
that's "good"—as in *fast*.

### Run-Length Slice Fundamentals {#Heading3}

First off, I have a confession to make: I'm not sure that the algorithm
I'll discuss is actually, precisely Bresenham's run-length slice
algorithm. It's been a long time since I read about this algorithm; in
the intervening years, I've misplaced Bresenham's article, and have been
unable to unearth it. As a result, I had to derive the algorithm from
scratch, which was admittedly more fun than reading about it, and also
ensured that I understood it inside and out. The upshot is that what I
discuss may or may not be Bresenham's run-length slice algorithm—but it
surely is fast.

The place to begin understanding the run-length slice algorithm is the
standard Bresenham's line-drawing algorithm. (I discussed the standard
Bresenham's line-drawing algorithm at length in the previous chapter.)
The basis of the standard approach is stepping one pixel at a time along
the major axis (the longer dimension of the line), while maintaining an
integer error term that indicates at each major-axis step how close the
line is to advancing halfway to the next pixel along the minor axis.
Figure 36.1 illustrates standard Bresenham's line drawing. The key point
here is that a calculation and a test are performed once for each step
along the major axis.

![](images/36-01.jpg)\
 **Figure 36.1**  *Standard Bresenham's line drawing.*
