  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](40-01.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](40-03.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

Advancing the X coordinates is easy. For each edge, we’ll store the
current X coordinate and all required error term information, and we’ll
use that to advance the edge one scan line at a time; then, we’ll resort
the AET by X coordinate as needed. Removing edges as they end is also
easy; we’ll just count down the length of each active edge on each scan
line and remove an edge when its count reaches zero. Adding edges as
their tops are encountered is a tad more complex. While there are a
number of ways to do this, one particularly efficient approach is to
start out by putting all the edges of the polygon, sorted by increasing
Y coordinate, into a single list, called the *global edge table* (GET).
Then, as each scan line is encountered, all edges at the start of the
GET that begin on the current scan line are moved to the AET; because
the GET is Y-sorted, there’s no need to search the entire GET. For still
greater efficiency, edges in the GET that share common Y coordinates can
be sorted by increasing X coordinate; this ensures that no more than one
pass through the AET per scan line is ever needed when adding new edges
from the GET in such a way as to keep the AET sorted in ascending X
order.

What form should the GET and AET take? Linked lists of edge structures,
as shown in Figure 40.3. With linked lists, all that’s required to move
edges from the GET to the AET as they become active, sort the AET, and
remove edges that have been fully drawn is the exchanging of a few
pointers.

In summary, we’ll initially store all the polygon edges in
Y-primary/X-secondary sort order in the GET, complete with initial X and
Y coordinates, error terms and error term adjustments, lengths, and
directions of X movement for each edge. Once the GET is built, we’ll do
the following:

**1.**  Set the current Y coordinate to the Y coordinate of the first
edge in the GET.

**2.**  Move all edges with the current Y coordinate from the GET to the
AET, removing them from the GET and maintaining the X-sorted order of
the AET.

**3.**  Draw all odd-to-even spans in the AET at the current Y
coordinate.

**4.**  Count down the lengths of all edges in the AET, removing any
edges that are done, and advancing the X coordinates of all remaining
edges in the AET by one scan line.

**5.**  Sort the AET in order of ascending X coordinate.

**6.**  Advance the current Y coordinate by one scan line.

**7.**  If either the AET or GET isn’t empty, go to step 2.

![](images/40-03.jpg)\
 **Figure 40.3**  *The global and active edge tables as linked lists.*

That’s really all there is to it. Compare Listing 40.1 to the fast
convex polygon filling code from Chapter 39, and you’ll see that,
contrary to expectation, complex polygon filling is indeed one of the
more sane and sensible corners of the universe.

**LISTING 40.1 L40-1.C**

     /* Color-fills an arbitrarily-shaped polygon described by VertexList.
        If the first and last points in VertexList are not the same, the path
        around the polygon is automatically closed. All vertices are offset
        by (XOffset, YOffset). Returns 1 for success, 0 if memory allocation
        failed. All C code tested with Borland C++.
        If the polygon shape is known in advance, speedier processing may be
        enabled by specifying the shape as follows: “convex” - a rubber band
        stretched around the polygon would touch every vertex in order;
        “nonconvex” - the polygon is not self-intersecting, but need not be
        convex; “complex” - the polygon may be self-intersecting, or, indeed,
        any sort of polygon at all. Complex will work for all polygons; convex
        is fastest. Undefined results will occur if convex is specified for a
        nonconvex or complex polygon.
        Define CONVEX_CODE_LINKED if the fast convex polygon filling code from
        Chapter 38 is linked in. Otherwise, convex polygons are
        handled by the complex polygon filling code.
        Nonconvex is handled as complex in this implementation. See text for a
        discussion of faster nonconvex handling. */

     #include <stdio.h>
     #include <math.h>
     #ifdef __TURBOC__
     #include <alloc.h>
     #else    /* MSC */
     #include <malloc.h>
     #endif
     #include “polygon.h”

     #define SWAP(a,b) {temp = a; a = b; b = temp;}

     struct EdgeState {
        struct EdgeState *NextEdge;
        int X;
        int StartY;
        int WholePixelXMove;
        int XDirection;
        int ErrorTerm;
        int ErrorTermAdjUp;
        int ErrorTermAdjDown;
        int Count;
     };

     extern void DrawHorizontalLineSeg(int, int, int, int);
     extern int FillConvexPolygon(struct PointListHeader *, int, int, int);
     static void BuildGET(struct PointListHeader *, struct EdgeState *, int, int);
     static void MoveXSortedToAET(int);
     static void ScanOutAET(int, int);
     static void AdvanceAET(void);
     static void XSortAET(void);

     /* Pointers to global edge table (GET) and active edge table (AET) */
     static struct EdgeState *GETPtr, *AETPtr;

     int FillPolygon(struct PointListHeader * VertexList, int Color,
           int PolygonShape, int XOffset, int YOffset)
     {
        struct EdgeState *EdgeTableBuffer;
        int CurrentY;

     #ifdef CONVEX_CODE_LINKED
        /* Pass convex polygons through to fast convex polygon filler */
        if (PolygonShape == CONVEX)
           return(FillConvexPolygon(VertexList, Color, XOffset, YOffset));
     #endif

        /* It takes a minimum of 3 vertices to cause any pixels to be
           drawn; reject polygons that are guaranteed to be invisible */
        if (VertexList->Length < 3)
           return(1);
        /* Get enough memory to store the entire edge table */
        if ((EdgeTableBuffer =
              (struct EdgeState *) (malloc(sizeof(struct EdgeState) *
              VertexList->Length))) == NULL)
           return(0);  /* couldn’’t get memory for the edge table */
        /* Build the global edge table */
        BuildGET(VertexList, EdgeTableBuffer, XOffset, YOffset);
        /* Scan down through the polygon edges, one scan line at a time,
           so long as at least one edge remains in either the GET or AET */
        AETPtr = NULL;    /* initialize the active edge table to empty */
        CurrentY = GETPtr->StartY; /* start at the top polygon vertex */
        while ((GETPtr != NULL) || (AETPtr != NULL)) {
           MoveXSortedToAET(CurrentY);  /* update AET for this scan line */
           ScanOutAET(CurrentY, Color); /* draw this scan line from AET */
           AdvanceAET();                /* advance AET edges 1 scan line */
           XSortAET();                  /* resort on X */
           CurrentY++;                  /* advance to the next scan line */
        }
        /* Release the memory we’ve allocated and we’re done */
        free(EdgeTableBuffer);
        return(1);
     }

     /* Creates a GET in the buffer pointed to by NextFreeEdgeStruc from
        the vertex list. Edge endpoints are flipped, if necessary, to
        guarantee all edges go top to bottom. The GET is sorted primarily
        by ascending Y start coordinate, and secondarily by ascending X
        start coordinate within edges with common Y coordinates. */
     static void BuildGET(struct PointListHeader * VertexList,
           struct EdgeState * NextFreeEdgeStruc, int XOffset, int YOffset)
     {
        int i, StartX, StartY, EndX, EndY, DeltaY, DeltaX, Width, temp;
        struct EdgeState *NewEdgePtr;
        struct EdgeState *FollowingEdge, **FollowingEdgeLink;
        struct Point *VertexPtr;

        /* Scan through the vertex list and put all non-0-height edges into
           the GET, sorted by increasing Y start coordinate */
        VertexPtr = VertexList->PointPtr;   /* point to the vertex list */
        GETPtr = NULL;    /* initialize the global edge table to empty */
        for (i = 0; i < VertexList->Length; i++) {
           /* Calculate the edge height and width */
           StartX = VertexPtr[i].X + XOffset;
           StartY = VertexPtr[i].Y + YOffset;
           /* The edge runs from the current point to the previous one */
           if (i == 0) {
              /* Wrap back around to the end of the list */
              EndX = VertexPtr[VertexList->Length-1].X + XOffset;
              EndY = VertexPtr[VertexList->Length-1].Y + YOffset;
           } else {
              EndX = VertexPtr[i-1].X + XOffset;
              EndY = VertexPtr[i-1].Y + YOffset;
           }
           /* Make sure the edge runs top to bottom */
           if (StartY > EndY) {
              SWAP(StartX, EndX);
              SWAP(StartY, EndY);
           }
           /* Skip if this can’t ever be an active edge (has 0 height) */
           if ((DeltaY = EndY - StartY) != 0) {
              /* Allocate space for this edge’s info, and fill in the
                 structure */
              NewEdgePtr = NextFreeEdgeStruc++;
              NewEdgePtr->XDirection =   /* direction in which X moves */
                    ((DeltaX = EndX - StartX) > 0) ? 1 : -1;
              Width = abs(DeltaX);
              NewEdgePtr->X = StartX;
              NewEdgePtr->StartY = StartY;
              NewEdgePtr->Count = DeltaY;
              NewEdgePtr->ErrorTermAdjDown = DeltaY;
              if (DeltaX >= 0)  /* initial error term going L->R */
                 NewEdgePtr->ErrorTerm = 0;
              else              /* initial error term going R->L */
                 NewEdgePtr->ErrorTerm = -DeltaY + 1;
              if (DeltaY >= Width) {     /* Y-major edge */
                 NewEdgePtr->WholePixelXMove = 0;
                 NewEdgePtr->ErrorTermAdjUp = Width;
              } else {                   /* X-major edge */
                 NewEdgePtr->WholePixelXMove =
                       (Width / DeltaY) * NewEdgePtr->XDirection;
                 NewEdgePtr->ErrorTermAdjUp = Width % DeltaY;
              }
              /* Link the new edge into the GET so that the edge list is
                 still sorted by Y coordinate, and by X coordinate for all
                 edges with the same Y coordinate */
              FollowingEdgeLink = &GETPtr;
              for (;;) {
                 FollowingEdge = *FollowingEdgeLink;
                 if ((FollowingEdge == NULL) ||
                       (FollowingEdge->StartY > StartY) ||
                       ((FollowingEdge->StartY == StartY) &&
                       (FollowingEdge->X >= StartX))) {
                    NewEdgePtr->NextEdge = FollowingEdge;
                    *FollowingEdgeLink = NewEdgePtr;
                    break;
                 }
                 FollowingEdgeLink = &FollowingEdge->NextEdge;
              }
           }
        }
     }

     /* Sorts all edges currently in the active edge table into ascending
        order of current X coordinates */
     static void XSortAET() {
        struct EdgeState *CurrentEdge, **CurrentEdgePtr, *TempEdge;
        int SwapOccurred;

        /* Scan through the AET and swap any adjacent edges for which the
           second edge is at a lower current X coord than the first edge.
           Repeat until no further swapping is needed */
        if (AETPtr != NULL) {
           do {
              SwapOccurred = 0;
              CurrentEdgePtr = &AETPtr;
              while ((CurrentEdge = *CurrentEdgePtr)->NextEdge != NULL) {
                 if (CurrentEdge->X > CurrentEdge->NextEdge->X) {
                    /* The second edge has a lower X than the first;
                       swap them in the AET */
                    TempEdge = CurrentEdge->NextEdge->NextEdge;
                    *CurrentEdgePtr = CurrentEdge->NextEdge;
                    CurrentEdge->NextEdge->NextEdge = CurrentEdge;
                    CurrentEdge->NextEdge = TempEdge;
                    SwapOccurred = 1;
                 }
                 CurrentEdgePtr = &(*CurrentEdgePtr)->NextEdge;
              }
           } while (SwapOccurred != 0);
        }
     }

     /* Advances each edge in the AET by one scan line.
        Removes edges that have been fully scanned. */
     static void AdvanceAET() {
        struct EdgeState *CurrentEdge, **CurrentEdgePtr;

        /* Count down and remove or advance each edge in the AET */
        CurrentEdgePtr = &AETPtr;
        while ((CurrentEdge = *CurrentEdgePtr) != NULL) {
           /* Count off one scan line for this edge */
           if ((--(CurrentEdge->Count)) == 0) {
              /* This edge is finished, so remove it from the AET */
              *CurrentEdgePtr = CurrentEdge->NextEdge;
           } else {
              /* Advance the edge’s X coordinate by minimum move */
              CurrentEdge->X += CurrentEdge->WholePixelXMove;
              /* Determine whether it’s time for X to advance one extra */
              if ((CurrentEdge->ErrorTerm +=
                    CurrentEdge->ErrorTermAdjUp) > 0) {
                 CurrentEdge->X += CurrentEdge->XDirection;
                 CurrentEdge->ErrorTerm -= CurrentEdge->ErrorTermAdjDown;
              }
              CurrentEdgePtr = &CurrentEdge->NextEdge;
           }
        }
     }

     /* Moves all edges that start at the specified Y coordinate from the
        GET to the AET, maintaining the X sorting of the AET. */
     static void MoveXSortedToAET(int YToMove) {
        struct EdgeState *AETEdge, **AETEdgePtr, *TempEdge;
        int CurrentX;

        /* The GET is Y sorted. Any edges that start at the desired Y
           coordinate will be first in the GET, so we’ll move edges from
           the GET to AET until the first edge left in the GET is no longer
           at the desired Y coordinate. Also, the GET is X sorted within
           each Y coordinate, so each successive edge we add to the AET is
           guaranteed to belong later in the AET than the one just added. */
        AETEdgePtr = &AETPtr;
        while ((GETPtr != NULL) && (GETPtr->StartY == YToMove)) {
           CurrentX = GETPtr->X;
           /* Link the new edge into the AET so that the AET is still
              sorted by X coordinate */
           for (;;) {
              AETEdge = *AETEdgePtr;
              if ((AETEdge == NULL) || (AETEdge->X >= CurrentX)) {
                 TempEdge = GETPtr->NextEdge;
                 *AETEdgePtr = GETPtr;  /* link the edge into the AET */
                 GETPtr->NextEdge = AETEdge;
                 AETEdgePtr = &GETPtr->NextEdge;
                 GETPtr = TempEdge;   /* unlink the edge from the GET */
                 break;
              } else {
                 AETEdgePtr = &AETEdge->NextEdge;
              }
           }
        }
     }

     /* Fills the scan line described by the current AET at the specified Y
        coordinate in the specified color, using the odd/even fill rule */
     static void ScanOutAET(int YToScan, int Color) {
        int LeftX;
        struct EdgeState *CurrentEdge;

        /* Scan through the AET, drawing line segments as each pair of edge
           crossings is encountered. The nearest pixel on or to the right
           of left edges is drawn, and the nearest pixel to the left of but
           not on right edges is drawn */
        CurrentEdge = AETPtr;
        while (CurrentEdge != NULL) {
           LeftX = CurrentEdge->X;
           CurrentEdge = CurrentEdge->NextEdge;
           DrawHorizontalLineSeg(YToScan, LeftX, CurrentEdge->X-1, Color);
           CurrentEdge = CurrentEdge->NextEdge;
        }
     }

  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](40-01.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](40-03.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

* * * * *

Graphics Programming Black Book © 2001 Michael Abrash
