  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](45-02.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](45-04.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

Also, page flipping wastes a good deal of time waiting for the page to
flip at the end of the frame. Dirty-rectangle animation never needs to
wait for anything because partially drawn images are never present in
display memory. Actually, in one sense, partially drawn images are
sometimes present because it’s possible for a rectangle to be partially
drawn when the scanning raster beam reaches that part of the screen.
This causes the rectangle to appear partially drawn for one frame,
producing a phenomenon I call “shearing.” Fortunately, shearing tends
not to be particularly distracting, especially for fairly small images,
but it can be a problem when copying large areas. This is one area in
which dirty-rectangle animation falls short of page flipping, because
page flipping has perfect display quality, never showing anything other
than a completely finished frame. Similarly, dirty-rectangle copying may
take two or more frame times to finish, so even if shearing doesn’t
happen, it’s still possible to have the images in the various dirty
rectangles show up non-simultaneously. In my experience, this latter
phenomenon is not a serious problem, but do be aware of it.

### Dirty Rectangles in Action {#Heading7}

Listing 45.1 demonstrates dirty-rectangle animation. This is a very
simple implementation, in several respects. For one thing, it’s written
entirely in C, and animation fairly cries out for assembly language. For
another thing, it uses far pointers, which C often handles with less
than optimal efficiency, especially because I haven’t used library
functions to copy and fill memory. (I did this so the code would work in
any memory model.) Also, Listing 45.1 doesn’t attempt to coalesce
rectangles so as to perform a minimum number of display-memory accesses;
instead, it copies each dirty rectangle to the screen, even if it
overlaps with another rectangle, so some pixels are copied multiple
times. Listing 45.1 runs pretty well, considering all of its failings;
on my 486/33, 10 11x11 images animate at a very respectable clip.

**LISTING 45.1 L45-1.C**

    /* Sample simple dirty-rectangle animation program. Doesn’t attempt to coalesce
       rectangles to minimize display memory accesses. Not even vaguely optimized!
       Tested with Borland C++ in the small model. */

    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <conio.h>
    #include <alloc.h>
    #include <memory.h>
    #include <dos.h>

    #define SCREEN_WIDTH  320
    #define SCREEN_HEIGHT 200
    #define SCREEN_SEGMENT 0xA000

    /* Describes a rectangle */
    typedef struct {
       int Top;
       int Left;
       int Right;
       int Bottom;
    } Rectangle;

    /* Describes an animated object */
    typedef struct {
       int X;            /* upper left corner in virtual bitmap */
       int Y;
       int XDirection;   /* direction and distance of movement */
       int YDirection;
    } Entity;

    /* Storage used for dirty rectangles */
    #define MAX_DIRTY_RECTANGLES  100
    int NumDirtyRectangles;
    Rectangle DirtyRectangles[MAX_DIRTY_RECTANGLES];

    /* If set to 1, ignore dirty rectangle list and copy the whole screen. */
    int DrawWholeScreen = 0;

    /* Pixels for image we’ll animate */
    #define IMAGE_WIDTH  11
    #define IMAGE_HEIGHT 11
    char ImagePixels[] = {
      15,15,15, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9,15,15,15,
      15,15, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9,15,15,
      15, 9, 9,14,14,14,14,14, 9, 9,15,
       9, 9,14,14,14,14,14,14,14, 9, 9,
       9, 9,14,14,14,14,14,14,14, 9, 9,
       9, 9,14,14,14,14,14,14,14, 9, 9,
       9, 9,14,14,14,14,14,14,14, 9, 9,
       9, 9,14,14,14,14,14,14,14, 9, 9,
      15, 9, 9,14,14,14,14,14, 9, 9,15,
      15,15, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9,15,15,
      15,15,15, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9,15,15,15,
    };
    /* animated entities */
    #define NUM_ENTITIES 10
    Entity Entities[NUM_ENTITIES];

    /* pointer to system buffer into which we’ll draw */
    char far *SystemBufferPtr;

    /* pointer to screen */
    char far *ScreenPtr;

    void EraseEntities(void);
    void CopyDirtyRectanglesToScreen(void);
    void DrawEntities(void);

    void main()
    {
       int i, XTemp, YTemp;
       unsigned int TempCount;
       char far *TempPtr;
       union REGS regs;
       /* Allocate memory for the system buffer into which we’ll draw */
       if (!(SystemBufferPtr = farmalloc((unsigned int)SCREEN_WIDTH*
             SCREEN_HEIGHT))) {
          printf("Couldn’t get memory\n");
          exit(1);
       }
       /* Clear the system buffer */
       TempPtr = SystemBufferPtr;
       for (TempCount = ((unsigned)SCREEN_WIDTH*SCREEN_HEIGHT); TempCount--; ) {
          *TempPtr++ = 0;
       }
       /* Point to the screen */
       ScreenPtr = MK_FP(SCREEN_SEGMENT, 0);

       /* Set up the entities we’ll animate, at random locations */
       randomize();
       for (i = 0; i < NUM_ENTITIES; i++) {
          Entities[i].X = random(SCREEN_WIDTH - IMAGE_WIDTH);
          Entities[i].Y = random(SCREEN_HEIGHT - IMAGE_HEIGHT);
          Entities[i].XDirection = 1;
          Entities[i].YDirection = -1;
       }
       /* Set 320x200 256-color graphics mode */
       regs.x.ax = 0x0013;
       int86(0x10, &regs, &regs);

       /* Loop and draw until a key is pressed */
       do {
          /* Draw the entities to the system buffer at their current locations,
             updating the dirty rectangle list */
          DrawEntities();

          /* Draw the dirty rectangles, or the whole system buffer if
             appropriate */
          CopyDirtyRectanglesToScreen();

          /* Reset the dirty rectangle list to empty */
          NumDirtyRectangles = 0;

          /* Erase the entities in the system buffer at their old locations,
             updating the dirty rectangle list */
          EraseEntities();

          /* Move the entities, bouncing off the edges of the screen */
          for (i = 0; i < NUM_ENTITIES; i++) {
             XTemp = Entities[i].X + Entities[i].XDirection;
             YTemp = Entities[i].Y + Entities[i].YDirection;
             if ((XTemp < 0) || ((XTemp + IMAGE_WIDTH) > SCREEN_WIDTH)) {
                Entities[i].XDirection = -Entities[i].XDirection;
                XTemp = Entities[i].X + Entities[i].XDirection;
             }
             if ((YTemp < 0) || ((YTemp + IMAGE_HEIGHT) > SCREEN_HEIGHT)) {
                Entities[i].YDirection = -Entities[i].YDirection;
                YTemp = Entities[i].Y + Entities[i].YDirection;
             }
             Entities[i].X = XTemp;
             Entities[i].Y = YTemp;
          }

       } while (!kbhit());
       getch();    /* clear the keypress */
       /* Back to text mode */
       regs.x.ax = 0x0003;
       int86(0x10, &regs, &regs);
    }
    /* Draw entities at current locations, updating dirty rectangle list. */
    void DrawEntities()
    {
       int i, j, k;
       char far *RowPtrBuffer;
       char far *TempPtrBuffer;
       char far *TempPtrImage;
       for (i = 0; i < NUM_ENTITIES; i++) {
          /* Remember the dirty rectangle info for this entity */
          if (NumDirtyRectangles >= MAX_DIRTY_RECTANGLES) {
             /* Too many dirty rectangles; just redraw the whole screen */
             DrawWholeScreen = 1;
          } else {
             /* Remember this dirty rectangle */
             DirtyRectangles[NumDirtyRectangles].Left = Entities[i].X;
             DirtyRectangles[NumDirtyRectangles].Top = Entities[i].Y;
             DirtyRectangles[NumDirtyRectangles].Right =
                   Entities[i].X + IMAGE_WIDTH;
             DirtyRectangles[NumDirtyRectangles++].Bottom =
                   Entities[i].Y + IMAGE_HEIGHT;
          }
          /* Point to the destination in the system buffer */
          RowPtrBuffer = SystemBufferPtr + (Entities[i].Y * SCREEN_WIDTH) +
                Entities[i].X;
          /* Point to the image to draw */
          TempPtrImage = ImagePixels;
          /* Copy the image to the system buffer */
          for (j = 0; j < IMAGE_HEIGHT; j++) {
             /* Copy a row */
             for (k = 0, TempPtrBuffer = RowPtrBuffer; k < IMAGE_WIDTH; k++) {
                *TempPtrBuffer++ = *TempPtrImage++;
             }
             /* Point to the next system buffer row */
             RowPtrBuffer += SCREEN_WIDTH;
          }
       }
    }
    /* Copy the dirty rectangles, or the whole system buffer if appropriate,
       to the screen. */
    void CopyDirtyRectanglesToScreen()
    {
       int i, j, k, RectWidth, RectHeight;
       unsigned int TempCount;
       unsigned int Offset;
       char far *TempPtrScreen;
       char far *TempPtrBuffer;

       if (DrawWholeScreen) {
          /* Just copy the whole buffer to the screen */
          DrawWholeScreen = 0;
          TempPtrScreen = ScreenPtr;
          TempPtrBuffer = SystemBufferPtr;
          for (TempCount = ((unsigned)SCREEN_WIDTH*SCREEN_HEIGHT); TempCount--; ) {
             *TempPtrScreen++ = *TempPtrBuffer++;
          }
       } else {
          /* Copy only the dirty rectangles */
          for (i = 0; i < NumDirtyRectangles; i++) {
             /* Offset in both system buffer and screen of image */
             Offset = (unsigned int) (DirtyRectangles[i].Top * SCREEN_WIDTH) +
                   DirtyRectangles[i].Left;
             /* Dimensions of dirty rectangle */
             RectWidth = DirtyRectangles[i].Right - DirtyRectangles[i].Left;
             RectHeight = DirtyRectangles[i].Bottom - DirtyRectangles[i].Top;
             /* Copy a dirty rectangle */
             for (j = 0; j < RectHeight; j++) {

                /* Point to the start of row on screen */
                TempPtrScreen = ScreenPtr + Offset;

                /* Point to the start of row in system buffer */
                TempPtrBuffer = SystemBufferPtr + Offset;

                /* Copy a row */
                for (k = 0; k < RectWidth; k++) {
                   *TempPtrScreen++ = *TempPtrBuffer++;
                }
                /* Point to the next row */
                Offset += SCREEN_WIDTH;
             }
          }
       }
    }
    /* Erase the entities in the system buffer at their current locations,
       updating the dirty rectangle list. */
    void EraseEntities()
    {
       int i, j, k;
       char far *RowPtr;
       char far *TempPtr;

       for (i = 0; i < NUM_ENTITIES; i++) {
          /* Remember the dirty rectangle info for this entity */
          if (NumDirtyRectangles >= MAX_DIRTY_RECTANGLES) {
             /* Too many dirty rectangles; just redraw the whole screen */
             DrawWholeScreen = 1;
          } else {
             /* Remember this dirty rectangle */
             DirtyRectangles[NumDirtyRectangles].Left = Entities[i].X;
             DirtyRectangles[NumDirtyRectangles].Top = Entities[i].Y;
             DirtyRectangles[NumDirtyRectangles].Right =
                   Entities[i].X + IMAGE_WIDTH;
             DirtyRectangles[NumDirtyRectangles++].Bottom =
                   Entities[i].Y + IMAGE_HEIGHT;
          }
          /* Point to the destination in the system buffer */
          RowPtr = SystemBufferPtr + (Entities[i].Y*SCREEN_WIDTH) + Entities[i].X;

          /* Clear the entity’s rectangle */
          for (j = 0; j < IMAGE_HEIGHT; j++) {
             /* Clear a row */
             for (k = 0, TempPtr = RowPtr; k < IMAGE_WIDTH; k++) {
                *TempPtr++ = 0;
             }
             /* Point to the next row */
             RowPtr += SCREEN_WIDTH;
          }
       }
    }

  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](45-02.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](45-04.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

* * * * *

Graphics Programming Black Book © 2001 Michael Abrash
