---
title: Michael Abrash's Graphics Programming Black Book, Special Edition
author: Michael Abrash
date: '1997-07-01'
isbn: '1576101746'
publisher: The Coriolis Group
category: 'Web and Software Development: Game Development,Web and Software Development:
  Graphics and Multimedia Development'
chapter: '48'
pages: 903-905
---

Four-pixel-wide patterns are more useful than you might imagine. There
are actually 2128 possible patterns (16 pixels, each with 28 possible
colors); that set is certainly large enough for most color-dithering
purposes, and includes many often-used patterns, such as halftones,
diagonal stripes, and crosshatches.

Furthermore, eight-wide patterns, which are widely used, can be drawn
with two passes, one for each half of the pattern. This principle can in
fact be extended to patterns of arbitrary multiple-of-four widths.
(Widths that aren't multiples of four are considerably more difficult to
handle, because the latches are four pixels wide; one possible solution
is expanding such patterns via repetition until they are
multiple-of-four widths.)

### Allocating Memory in Mode X {#Heading3}

Listing 48.2 raises some interesting questions about the allocation of
display memory in Mode X. In Listing 48.2, whenever a pattern is to be
drawn, that pattern is first drawn in its entirety at the very end of
display memory; the latches are then loaded from that copy of the
pattern before each scan line of the actual fill is drawn. Why this
double copying process, and why is the pattern stored in that particular
area of display memory?

The double copying process is used because it's the easiest way to load
the latches. Remember, there's no way to get information directly from
the CPU to the latches; the information must first be written to some
location in display memory, because the latches can be loaded *only*
from display memory. By writing the pattern to off-screen memory, we
don't have to worry about interfering with whatever is currently
displayed on the screen.

As for why the pattern is stored exactly where it is, that's part of a
master memory allocation plan that will come to fruition in the next
chapter, when I implement a Mode X animation program. Figure 48.3 shows
this master plan; the first two pages of memory (each 76,800 pixels
long, spanning 19,200 addresses—that is, 19,200 pixel quadruplets—in
display memory) are reserved for page flipping, the next page of memory
(also 76,800 pixels long) is reserved for storing the background (which
is used to restore the holes left after images move), the last 16 pixels
(four addresses) of display memory are reserved for the pattern buffer,
and the remaining 31,728 pixels (7,932 addresses) of display memory are
free for storage of icons, images, temporary buffers, or whatever.

![**Figure 48.3**  *A useful Mode X display memory layout.*](images/48-03.jpg)

This is an efficient organization for animation, but there are certainly
many other possible setups. For example, you might choose to have a
solid-colored background, in which case you could dispense with the
background page (instead using the solid rectangle fill routine to
replace the background after images move), freeing up another 76,800
pixels of off-screen storage for images and buffers. You could even
eliminate page-flipping altogether if you needed to free up a great deal
of display memory. For example, with enough free display memory it is
possible in Mode X to create a virtual bitmap three times larger than
the screen, with the screen becoming a scrolling window onto that larger
bitmap. This technique has been used to good effect in a number of
animated games, with and without the use of Mode X.

### Copying Pixel Blocks within Display Memory {#Heading4}

Another fine use for the latches is copying pixels from one place in
display memory to another. Whenever both the source and the destination
share the same nibble alignment (that is, their start addresses modulo
four are the same), it is not only possible but quite easy to use the
latches to copy four pixels at a time. Listing 48.3 shows a routine that
copies via the latches. (When the source and destination do not share
the same nibble alignment, the latches cannot be used because the source
and destination planes for any given pixel differ. In that case, you can
set the Read Map register to select a source plane and the Map Mask
register to select the corresponding destination plane. Then, copy all
pixels in that plane, repeating for all four planes.)

> ![](images/i.jpg)
> Although copying through the latches is, in general, a speedy technique,
> especially on slower VGAs, it's not always a win. Reading video memory
> tends to be quite a bit slower than writing, and on a fast VLB or PCI
> adapter, it can be faster to copy from main memory to display memory
> than it is to copy from display memory to display memory via the
> latches.