One note: I'll use a purely *right-handed* convention for coordinate
systems. Right-handed means that if you hold your right hand with your
fingers curled and the thumb sticking out, the thumb points along the Z
axis and the fingers point in the direction of rotation from the X axis
to the Y axis, as shown in Figure 50.2. Rotations about an axis are
counter-clockwise, as viewed looking down an axis toward the origin. The
handedness of a coordinate system is just a convention, and left-handed
would do equally well; however, right-handed is generally used for
object and world space. Sometimes, the handedness is flipped for view
space, so that increasing Z equals increasing distance from the viewer
along the line of sight, but I have chosen not to do that here, to avoid
confusion. Therefore, Z decreases as distance along the line of sight
increases; a view space coordinate of (0,0,-1000) is directly ahead,
twice as far away as a coordinate of (0,0,-500).

![](images/50-01.jpg)\
 **Figure 50.1**  *The 3-D drawing pipeline.*

![](images/50-02.jpg)\
 **Figure 50.2**  *A right-handed coordinate system.*

#### Projection {#Heading5}

Working backward from the final image, we want to take the vertices of a
polygon, as transformed into view space, and project them to 2-D
coordinates on the screen, which, for projection purposes, is assumed to
be centered on and perpendicular to the Z axis in view space, at some
distance from the screen. We're after visual realism, so we'll want to
do a perspective projection, in order that farther objects look smaller
than nearer objects, and so that the field of view will widen with
distance. This is done by scaling the X and Y coordinates of each point
proportionately to the Z distance of the point from the viewer, a simple
matter of similar triangles, as shown in Figure 50.3. It doesn't really
matter how far down the Z axis the screen is assumed to be; what matters
is the ratio of the distance of the screen from the viewpoint to the
width of the screen. This ratio defines the rate of divergence of the
viewing pyramid—the full field of view—and is used for performing all
perspective projections. Once perspective projection has been performed,
all that remains before calling the polygon filler is to convert the
projected X and Y coordinates to integers, appropriately clipped and
adjusted as necessary to center the origin on the screen or otherwise
map the image into a window, if desired.

#### Translation {#Heading6}

*Translation* means adding X, Y, and Z offsets to a coordinate to move
it linearly through space. Translation is as simple as it seems; it
requires nothing more than an addition for each axis. Translation is,
for example, used to move objects from object space, in which the center
of the object is typically the origin (0,0,0), into world space, where
the object may be located anywhere.

![](images/50-03.jpg)\
 **Figure 50.3**  *Perspective projection.*

#### Rotation {#Heading7}

*Rotation* is the process of circularly moving coordinates around the
origin. For our present purposes, it's necessary only to rotate objects
about their centers in object space, so as to turn them to the desired
attitude before translating them into world space.

Rotation of a point about an axis is accomplished by transforming it
according to the formulas shown in Figure 50.4. These formulas map into
the more generally useful matrix-multiplication forms also shown in
Figure 50.4. Matrix representation is more useful for two reasons:
First, it is possible to concatenate multiple rotations into a single
matrix by multiplying them together in the desired order; that single
matrix can then be used to perform the rotations more efficiently.

![](images/50-04.jpg)\
 **Figure 50.4**  *3-D rotation formulas.*

Second, 3x3 rotation matrices can become the upper-left-hand portions of
4x4 matrices that also perform translation (and scaling as well, but we
won't need scaling in the near future), as shown in Figure 50.5. A 4x4
matrix of this sort utilizes homogeneous coordinates; that's a topic way
beyond this book, but, basically, homogeneous coordinates allow you to
handle both rotations and translations with 4x4 matrices, thereby
allowing the same code to work with either, and making it possible to
concatenate a long series of rotations and translations into a single
matrix that performs the same transformation as the sequence of
rotations and transformations.

There's much more to be said about transformations and the supporting
matrix math, but, in the interests of getting to working code in this
chapter, I'll leave that to be discussed as the need arises.

### A Simple 3-D Example {#Heading8}

At this point, we know enough to be able to put together a simple
working 3-D animation example. The example will do nothing more
complicated than display a single polygon as it sits in 3-D space,
rotating around the Y axis. To make things a little more interesting,
we'll let the user move the polygon around in space with the arrow keys,
and with the "A" (away), and "T" (toward) keys. The sample program
requires two sorts of functionality: The ability to transform and
project the polygon from object space onto the screen (3-D
functionality), and the ability to draw the projected polygon (complete
with clipping) and handle the other details of animation (2-D
functionality).

![](images/50-05.jpg)\
 **Figure 50.5**  *A 4x4 Transformation Matrix.*

Happily (and not coincidentally), we put together a nice 2-D animation
framework back in Chapters 47, 48, and 49, during our exploratory
discussion of Mode X, so we don't have much to worry about in terms of
non-3-D details. Basically, we'll use Mode X (320x240, 256 colors), and
we'll flip between two display pages, drawing to one while the other is
displayed. One new 2-D element that we need is the ability to clip
polygons; while we could avoid this for the moment by restricting the
range of motion of the polygon so that it stays fully on the screen,
certainly in the long run we'll want to be able to handle partially or
fully clipped polygons. Listing 50.1 is the low-level code for a Mode X
polygon filler that supports clipping. (The high-level polygon fill code
is mode independent, and is the same as that presented in Chapters 38,
39, and 40, as noted further on.) The clipping is implemented at the low
level, by trimming the Y extent of the scan line list up front, then
clipping the X coordinates of each scan line in turn. This is not a
particularly fast approach to clipping—ideally, the polygon would be
clipped before it was scanned into a line list, avoiding potentially
wasted scanning and eliminating the line-by-line X clipping—but it's
much simpler, and, as we shall see, polygon filling performance is the
least of our worries at the moment.
