#### Notes on the 3-D Animation Example {#Heading9}

The sample program transforms the polygon's vertices from object space
to world space to view space to the screen, as described earlier. In
this case, world space and view space are congruent—we're looking right
down the negative Z axis of world space—so the transformation matrix
from world to view is the identity matrix; you might want to experiment
with changing this matrix to change the viewpoint. The sample program
uses 4x4 homogeneous coordinate matrices to perform transformations, as
described above. Floating-point arithmetic is used for all 3-D
calculations. Setting the translation from object space to world space
is a simple matter of changing the appropriate entry in the fourth
column of the object-to-world transformation matrix. Setting the
rotation around the Y axis is almost as simple, requiring only the
setting of the four matrix entries that control the Y rotation to the
sines and cosines of the desired rotation. However, rotations involving
more than one axis require multiple rotation matrices, one for each axis
rotated around; those matrices are then concatenated together to produce
the object-to-world transformation. This area is trickier than it might
initially appear to be; more in the near future.

The maximum translation along the Z axis is limited to -40; this keeps
the polygon from extending past the viewpoint to positive Z coordinates.
This would wreak havoc with the projection and 2-D clipping, and would
require 3-D clipping, which is far more complicated than 2-D. We'll get
to 3-D clipping at some point, but, for now, it's much simpler just to
limit all vertices to negative Z coordinates. The polygon does get
mighty close to the viewpoint, though; run the program and use the "T"
key to move the polygon as close as possible—the near vertex swinging
past provides a striking sense of perspective.

The performance of Listing 50.5 is, perhaps, surprisingly good, clocking
in at 16 frames per second on a 20 MHz 386 with a VGA of average speed
and no 387, although there is, of course, only one polygon being drawn,
rather than the hundreds or thousands we'd ultimately like. What's far
more interesting is where the execution time goes. Even though the
program is working with only one polygon, 73 percent of the time goes
for transformation and projection. An additional 7 percent is spent
waiting to flip the screen. Only 20 percent of the total time is spent
in all other activity—and only 2 percent is spent actually drawing
polygons. Clearly, we'll want to tackle transformation and projection
first when we look to speed things up. (Note, however, that a math
coprocessor would considerably decrease the time taken by floating-point
calculations.)

In Listing 50.3, when the extent of the bounding rectangle is calculated
for later erasure purposes, that extent is clipped to the screen. This
is due to the lack of clipping in the rectangle fill code from Listing
47.5 in Chapter 47; the problem would more appropriately be addressed by
putting clipping into the fill code, but, unfortunately, I lack the
space to do that here.

Finally, observe the jaggies crawling along the edges of the polygon as
it rotates. This is temporal aliasing at its finest! We won't address
antialiasing further, realtime antialiasing being decidedly nontrivial,
but this should give you an idea of why antialiasing is so desirable.

### An Ongoing Journey {#Heading10}

In the next chapter, we'll assign fronts and backs to polygons, and
start drawing only those that are facing the viewer. That will enable us
to handle convex polyhedrons, such as tetrahedrons and cubes. We'll also
look at interactively controllable rotation, and at more complex
rotations than the simple rotation around the Y axis that we did this
time. In time, we'll use fixed-point arithmetic to speed things up, and
do some shading and texture mapping. The journey has only begun; we'll
get to all that and more soon.
