  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](52-08.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](53-02.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

Chapter 53\
 Raw Speed and More {#Heading1}
-------------------

### The Naked Truth About Speed in 3-D Animation {#Heading2}

Years ago, this friend of mine—let’s call him Bert—went to Hawaii with
three other fellows to celebrate their graduation from high school. This
was an unchaperoned trip, and they behaved pretty much as responsibly as
you’d expect four teenagers to behave, which is to say, not; there’s a
story about a rental car that, to this day, Bert can’t bring himself to
tell. They had a good time, though, save for one thing: no girls.

By and by, they met a group of girls by the pool, but the boys couldn’t
get past the hi-howya-doin stage, so they retired to their hotel room to
plot a better approach. This being the early ’70s, and them being
slightly tipsy teenagers with raging hormones and the effective combined
IQ of four eggplants, it took them no time at all to come up with a
brilliant plan: streaking. The girls had mentioned their room number, so
the boys piled into the elevator, pushed the button for the girls’
floor, shucked their clothes as fast as they could, and sprinted to the
girls’ door. They knocked on the door and ran on down the hall. As the
girls opened their door, Bert and his crew raced past, toward the
elevator, laughing hysterically.

Bert was by far the fastest of them all. He whisked between the elevator
doors just as they started to close; by the time his friends got there,
it was too late, and the doors slid shut in their faces. As the elevator
began to move, Bert could hear the frantic pounding of six fists
thudding on the closed doors. As Bert stood among the clothes littering
the elevator floor, the thought of his friends stuck in the hall, naked
as jaybirds, was just too much, and he doubled over with helpless
laughter, tears streaming down his face. The universe had blessed him
with one of those exceedingly rare moments of perfect timing and
execution.

The universe wasn’t done with Bert quite yet, though. He was still
contorted with laughter—and still quite thoroughly undressed—when the
elevator doors opened again. On the lobby.

And with that, we come to this chapter’s topics: raw speed and hidden
surfaces.

### Raw Speed, Part 1: Assembly Language {#Heading3}

I would like to state, here and for the record, that I am not an
assembly language fanatic. Frankly, I prefer programming in C; assembly
language is hard work, and I can get a whole lot more done with fewer
hassles in C. However, I *am* a performance fanatic, performance being
defined as having programs be as nimble as possible in those areas where
the user wants fast response. And, in the course of pursuing
performance, there are times when a little assembly language goes a long
way.

We’re now four chapters into development of the X-Sharp 3-D animation
package. In realtime animation, performance is *sine qua non* (Latin for
“Make it fast or find another line of work”), so some judiciously
applied assembly language is in order. In the previous chapter, we got
up to a serviceable performance level by switching to fixed-point math,
then implementing the fixed-point multiplication and division functions
in assembly in order to take advantage of the 386’s 32-bit capabilities.
There’s another area of the program that fairly cries out for assembly
language: matrix math. The function to multiply a matrix by a vector
(**XformVec()**) and the function to concatenate matrices
(**ConcatXforms()**) both loop heavily around calls to **FixedMul();** a
lot of calling and looping can be eliminated by converting these
functions to pure assembly language.

Listing 53.1 is the module FIXED.ASM from this chapter’s iteration of
X-Sharp, with **XformVec()** and **ConcatXforms()** implemented in
assembly language. The code is heavily optimized, to the extent of
completely unrolling the loops via macros so that looping is eliminated
altogether. FIXED.ASM is highly effective; the time taken for matrix
math is now down to the point where it’s a fairly minor component of
execution time, representing less than ten percent of the total. It’s
time to turn our optimization sights elsewhere.

  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](52-08.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](53-02.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

* * * * *

Graphics Programming Black Book © 2001 Michael Abrash
