  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](53-04.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](54-02.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

Chapter 54\
 3-D Shading {#Heading1}
------------

### Putting Realistic Surfaces on Animated 3-D Objects {#Heading2}

At the end of the previous chapter, X-Sharp had just acquired basic
hidden-surface capability, and performance had been vastly improved
through the use of fixed-point arithmetic. In this chapter, we're going
to add quite a bit more: support for 8088 and 80286 PCs, a general color
model, and shading. That's an awful lot to cover in one chapter
(actually, it'll spill over into the next chapter), so let's get to it!

### Support for Older Processors {#Heading3}

To date, X-Sharp has run on only the 386 and 486, because it uses 32-bit
multiply and divide instructions that sub-386 processors don't support.
I chose 32-bit instructions for two reasons: They're much faster for
16.16 fixed-point arithmetic than any approach that works on the 8088
and 286; and they're much easier to implement than any other approach.
In short, I was after maximum performance, and I was perhaps just a
little lazy.

I should have known better than to try to sneak this one by you. The
most common feedback I've gotten on X-Sharp is that I should make it
support the 8088 and 286. Well, I can take a hint as well as the next
guy. Listing 54.1 is an improved version of FIXED.ASM, containing dual
386/8088 versions of **CosSin(), XformVec()**, and **ConcatXforms()**,
as well as **FixedMul()** and **FixedDiv()**.

Given the new version of FIXED.ASM, with **USE386** set to 0, X-Sharp
will now run on any processor. That's not to say that it will run fast
on any processor, or at least not as fast as it used to. The switch to
8088 instructions makes X-Sharp's fixed-point calculations about 2.5
times slower overall. Since a PC is perhaps 40 times slower than a
486/33, we're talking about a hundred-times speed difference between the
low end and mainstream. A 486/33 can animate a 72-sided ball, complete
with shading (as discussed later), at 60 frames per second (fps), with
plenty of cycles to spare; an 8-MHz AT can animate the same ball at
about 6 fps. Clearly, the level of animation an application uses must be
tailored to the available CPU horsepower.

The implementation of a 32-bit multiply using 8088 instructions is a
simple matter of adding together four partial products. A 32-bit divide
is not so simple, however. In fact, in Listing 54.1 I've chosen not to
implement a full 32x32 divide, but rather only a 32x16 divide. The
reason is simple: performance. A 32x16 divide can be implemented on an
8088 with two **DIV** instructions, but a 32x32 divide takes a great
deal more work, so far as I can see. (If anyone has a fast 32x32 divide,
or has a faster way to handle signed multiplies and divides than the
approach taken by Listing 54.1, please drop me a line care of the
publisher.) In X-Sharp, division is used only to divide either X or Y by
Z in the process of projecting from view space to screen space, so the
cost of using a 32x16 divide is merely some inaccuracy in calculating
screen coordinates, especially when objects get very close to the Z = 0
plane. This error is not cumulative (that is, it doesn't carry over to
later frames), and in my experience doesn't cause noticeable image
degradation; therefore, given the already slow performance of the 8088
and 286, I've opted for performance over precision.

At any rate, please keep in mind that the non-386 version of
**FixedDiv()** is *not* a general-purpose 32x32 fixed-point division
routine. In fact, it will generate a divide-by-zero error if passed a
fixed-point divisor between -1 and 1. As I've explained, the non-386
version of **Fixed-Div()** is designed to do just what X-Sharp needs,
and no more, as quickly as possible.

  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](53-04.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](54-02.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

* * * * *

Graphics Programming Black Book Â© 2001 Michael Abrash
