  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](59-06.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](60-02.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

Chapter 60\
 Compiling BSP Trees {#Heading1}
--------------------

### Taking BSP Trees from Concept to Reality {#Heading2}

As long-time readers of my columns know, I tend to move my family around
the country quite a bit. Change doesn't come out of the blue, so there's
some interesting history to every move, but the roots of the latest move
go back even farther than usual. To wit:

In 1986, just after we moved from Pennsylvania to California, I started
writing a column for *Programmer's Journal*. I was paid peanuts for
writing it, and I doubt if even 5,000 people saw some of the first
issues the columns appeared in, but I had a lot of fun exploring fast
graphics for the EGA and VGA.

By 1991, we were in Vermont, and I was writing the *Graphics
Programming* column for *Dr. Dobb's Journal* (and having a great time
doing it, even though it took all my spare nights and weekends to stay
ahead of the deadlines). In those days I received a lot of unsolicited
evaluation software, including a PC shareware game called Commander
Keen, a side-scrolling game that was every bit as good as the hot
Nintendo games of the day. I loved the way the game looked, and actually
drafted a column opening about how for years I'd been claiming that the
PC could be a great game machine in the hands of great programmers, and
here, finally, was the proof, in the form of Commander Keen. In the end,
though, I decided that would be too close to a product review, an area
that I've observed inflames passions in nonconstructive ways, so I went
with a different opening.

In 1992, I did a series of columns about my X-Sharp 3-D library, and
hung out on *DDJ*'s bulletin board. There was another guy who hung out
there who knew a lot about 3-D, a fellow named John Carmack who was
surely the only game programmer I'd ever heard of who developed under
NEXTSTEP. When we moved to Redmond, I didn't have time for BBSs anymore,
though.

In early 1993, I hired Chris Hecker. Later that year, Chris showed me an
alpha copy of DOOM, and I nearly fell out of my chair. About a year
later, Chris forwarded me a newsgroup post about NEXTSTEP, and said,
"Isn't this the guy you used to know on the *DDJ* bulletin board?"
Indeed it was John Carmack; what's more, it turned out that John was the
guy who had written DOOM. I sent him a congratulatory piece of mail, and
he sent back some thoughts about what he was working on, and somewhere
in there I asked if he ever came up my way. It turned out he had family
in Seattle, so he stopped in and visited, and we had a great time.

Over the next year, we exchanged some fascinating mail, and I became
steadily more impressed with John's company, id Software. Eventually,
John asked if I'd be interested in joining id, and after a good bit of
consideration I couldn't think of anything else that would be as much
fun or teach me as much. The upshot is that here we all are in Dallas,
our fourth move of 2,000 miles or more since I've starting writing in
the computer field, and now I'm writing some seriously cool 3-D
software.

Now that I'm here, it's an eye-opener to look back and see how events
fit together over the last decade. You see, when John started doing PC
game programming he learned fast graphics programming from those early
*Programmer's Journal* articles of mine. The copy of Commander Keen that
validated my faith in the PC as a game machine was the fruit of those
articles, for that was an id game (although I didn't know that then).
When John was hanging out on the *DDJ* BBS, he had just done Castle
Wolfenstein 3-D, the first great indoor 3-D game, and was thinking about
how to do DOOM. (If only I'd known that then!) And had I not hired
Chris, or had he not somehow remembered me talking about that guy who
used NEXTSTEP, I'd never have gotten back in touch with John, and things
would surely be different. (At the very least, I wouldn't be hearing
jokes about how my daughter's going to grow up saying "y'all".)

I think there's a worthwhile lesson to be learned from all this, a
lesson that I've seen hold true for many other people, as well. If you
do what you love, and do it as well as you can, good things will
eventually come of it. Not necessarily quickly or easily, but if you
stick with it, they will come. There are threads that run through our
lives, and by the time we've been adults for a while, practically
everything that happens has roots that run far back in time. The
implication should be clear: If you want good things to happen in your
future, stretch yourself and put in the extra effort now at whatever you
care passionately about, so those roots will have plenty to work with
down the road.

All this is surprisingly closely related to this chapter's topic, BSP
trees, because John is the fellow who brought BSP trees into the
spotlight by building DOOM around them. He also got me started with BSP
trees by explaining how DOOM worked and getting me interested enough to
want to experiment; the BSP compiler in this article is the direct
result. Finally, John has been an invaluable help to me as I've learned
about BSP trees, as will become evident when we discuss BSP
optimization.

Onward to compiling BSP trees.

### Compiling BSP Trees {#Heading3}

As you'll recall from the previous chapter, a BSP tree is nothing more
than a series of binary subdivisions that partion space into
ever-smaller pieces. That's a simple data structure, and a BSP compiler
is a correspondingly simple tool. First, it groups all the surfaces
(lines in 2-D, or polygons in 3-D) together into a single subspace that
encompasses the entire world of the database. Then, it chooses one of
the surfaces as the root node, and uses its line or plane to divide the
remaining surfaces into two subspaces, splitting surfaces into two parts
if they cross the line or plane of the root. Each of the two resultant
subspaces is then processed in the same fashion, and so on, recursively,
until the point is reached where all surfaces have been assigned to
nodes, and each leaf surface subdivides a subspace that is empty except
for that surface. Put another way, the root node carves space into two
parts, and the root's children carve each of those parts into two more
parts, and so on, with each surface carving ever smaller subspaces,
until all surfaces have been used. (Actually, there are many other lines
or planes that a BSP tree can use to carve up space, but this is the
approach we'll use in the current discussion.)

  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------
  [Previous](59-06.html)   [Table of Contents](index.html)   [Next](60-02.html)
  ------------------------ --------------------------------- --------------------

* * * * *

Graphics Programming Black Book Â© 2001 Michael Abrash
